Lead living organisms to produce organic composite materials with outstanding properties combine hard and soft component. These compounds (E.g., tooth enamel, dentin, and mother of Pearl) have locally optimised properties in all three dimensions. This is achieved through a precise control of the orientation and position of anisotropic Nano - and micro components. This project will mimic organic materials to design efficient materials with high strength and to produce. Lay summary content and target it has been suggested, that composites with anisotropic particles, where the particle orientation in one, two, or three dimensions is controlled, reinforce materials in specific directions. Magnetic/electrical fields representing a multifaceted instrument to control the orientation of the components. But not only the spatial location, but also the orientation of the reinforcing particles is the decisive factor here. Also the nature applies these sophisticated mechanisms to cope with locally different mechanical stress on several length scales and modes (shear, bending and torsion). Here, I propose an alternative approach to the development of complex composites. With the help of external electric field gradients (in contrast to constant fields), dielectrophoresis, the check at the same time the space and the orientation distribution of anisotropic particles. The self-organization of particles in domains in the micrometer range scientific and societal implications, in addition to the possible improvement of the mechanical properties of artificial construction materials [through this design strategy], has other possible applications, such as Photonic crystals, sensors and micro-lens. Furthermore, basic topics of colloid science are studied, as confined crystallization, melt or glass formation of particles. New strategies to control of the spatial distribution and orientation of anisotropic particles allow the production of materials that are similar to complex built as their analogues of biological. As a result they obtain mechanical strength and robustness, exceeding even that of their natural role models. In this way it is conceivable materials developed, which are light as plastic, but still solid as steel.
