Lead implementation of methane (CH4), carbon dioxide (CO2) (? dry reforming?) of metal nanoparticles on oxide substrates with from initio computer simulations examines. This, the reaction mechanism, the speed determining steps, as well as the contribution of the individual catalyst components under reaction conditions to be determined. Lay summary in the chemical industry and heterogeneous catalysts are ubiquitous to the energy industry. But lacking the understanding of these systems at the molecular level, and it is difficult for the rational development of new heterogeneous catalysts. However, this understanding is essential to the activity, product per time, and selectivity, increasing product distribution of heterogeneous catalysts. Metallnanopartikel are distributed on oxide media with these catalysts with most widely disproven. This research project is about the implementation of methane and carbon dioxide to carbon monoxide and hydrogen (synthesis gas). This syngas is a versatile feedstock for liquid fuels, solvents and fertilizer. The goal of this project is to enable the influence of each component of the catalyst in the mechanism of? dry reforming? Reaction to understand so far, the complexity of the system prevents a theoretical understanding. We employ sophisticated ab initio calculations for this purpose. These computer simulations allow us to study the reaction mechanism and establishing structure-activity relationships for the used catalysts. The dynamic changes and the high complexity of the actual metal/carrier catalyst under reaction conditions present particular challenges for the computer-aided simulation. With the completion of this investigation, we will have identified the speed determining step. Still, the influences of the Metallnanopartikel, as well as a possible involvement of the substrate and the particle-carrier interface be elucidated. Here, the project aims at identifying the information required to develop of more active and selective catalysts for the? dry reforming? Process. In addition, this is also a deeper understanding of the influence of substrates on the processes in heterogeneous catalysis.  
