Lead Lay summary The folding, translocation and activation of several types of protein requires the aid of specialized proteins called molecular chaperones. 70-kDalton Heat Shock Protein (Hsp70) is a central component of the cellular chaperone network with disparate cellular functions which include preventing protein aggregation, unfolding, solubilizing aggregates, translocating proteins across membranes and remodeling native proteins complexes. Consequently, Hsp70 is implicated in a wide range of diseases including cancer, neurodegeneration and infection.  All these functions depend on the ability of Hsp70 chaperones to bind to and release substrates in an ATP-regulated cycle.  Even if extensive experimental work has been devoted to the study of Hsp70 conformational transitions, the amount of structural information about Hsp70 functional cycle remains limited.  The goal of this project is to characterize the functional cycle at the atomistic level by means of Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations.  Enhanced sampling algorithms, such as metadynamics, will be used to circumvent the difficulties in simulating systems of this size and complexity with accurate models. These enhanced sampling simulations will be coupled with structural information provided by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and fluorescence energy transfer experiments.  This combined approach will extend our understanding of the Hsp70 conformational dynamics beyond state-of-the-art methodologies, ultimately leading to an unprecedented  description of the different conformational states and pathways in Hsp70 chaperone cycle. Starting from atomistic insights into the Hsp70 mechanism, the broader question of how these  chaperones interacts with other proteins and perform their cellular functions may be addressed. To this aim, the results obtained through atomistic simulations will be used, along with further experimental data, to devise a coarse-grained computational model of Hsp70, which will allow to simulate complex Hsp70-mediated cellular processes.  
