Lead the symmetries are omnipresent. Trees and flowers up to the molecular structure of matter. It not is therefore not surprising that since ancient times the symmetries were used to try to explain different phenomena, they were seen as a principle underlying nature. Nowadays they form one of the bases of theoretical physics, for example we have understood that the invariance under time translation corresponds to the law of conservation of energy. For example, specify the Symmetries of a system is equivalent to specifying the characteristics. Lay summary, therefore, it is crucial to understand all the Symmetries of a system to simplify the study of its dynamics. In the same spirit that choose spherical coordinates to describe a particle in a spherically symmetric potential simplifies the problem considerably. It is not uncommon that a symmetry, although that is present in a system, is not obvious to some observers. Identify all symmetries is fundamental for the construction of a model.       Although consistent symmetry, linking systems of different sizes, is not carried out in the nature in an obvious way, this does not mean that it is not present. It is more complicated (but not impossible) to understand that the Earth is spherical when one is on its surface when it is in space. The same situation can occur in the case of the consistent symmetry. It can be present but non-obvious way. In this project we use an approach to modify the Standard template to be symmetrically consistent by introducing a degree of freedom (particle) additional, the dilaton. The problem found this doing is that quantum corrections usually spoil the symmetry. The goal of this project is to study the changes in procedures for the consistent symmetry to be also a symmetry at the quantum level. The project aims not only to answer rather formal questions of quantum field theory, it can also potentially help understand problems for a long time the Standard model: the fine adjustment and the hierarchy problem. In the light of the current data from the LHC it is reasonable to seek an alternative explanation to those existing already (supersymmetry or technicolor). It is suggested that the consistent symmetry can be a key to understand the hierarchical problem. In this regard the results of the project will be useful.  
