Lead in allergic individuals produces the body's immune system by IgE antibodies to allergens egg whites. These bind specific receptors on inflammatory cells in the blood and tissues. Meet such IgE-laden cells again on an allergen, there is an immediate allergic reaction. We have recently described a new mechanism, as such IgE actively can be replaced antibodies using a new inhibitor of the receptor and thus the allergic cascade is interrupted. Lay summary title of the research project: novel strategies to prevent allergic hypersensitivity reactions using disruptive inhibitor new strategies for the prevention of allergic reactions with the help of IgE IgE inhibitors lead: in allergic individuals the body's immune system by IgE antibodies to allergens produced proteins. These bind specific receptors on inflammatory cells in the blood and tissues. Meet such IgE-laden cells again on an allergen, there is an immediate allergic reaction. We have recently described a new mechanism, as such IgE actively can be replaced antibodies using a new inhibitor of the receptor and thus the allergic cascade is interrupted. Objectives of the research project at the beginning of the research and the results after completion of the project: In this study we will test inhibitor at the molecular, cellular, and systemic level the newly described IgE. First and foremost, we hope to get us this important information about the General role of IgE in allergic systems. Furthermore, we are convinced that our results of high relevance for the development of new therapeutic approaches will be. Scientific and social context of the research project: in recent decades, a significant increase in the prevalence of allergic diseases was recorded mainly in industrialised countries and increases the number of allergy sufferers around the world yet always continuously. Alone in the United States, more than 50 million people from allergies are affected. Although the molecular basic mechanism of these reactions is already well characterized, lacks effective and sustainable treatment options at the time. The most therapeutic approaches based on controlling symptoms and therefore does not interfere with the actual cause of the disease. With our work we want to explore new strategies for combating cause allergic reactions and describe.
