Lead Lay summary problem: the majority of currently available drugs target (GPCR) G-protein-coupled receptors, a large family of membrane proteins whose main role is to initiate a wide range of signals within the cell. Each individual receiver continuously explores a set of - the three-dimensional arrangements of the protein - different conformations and conformations occupied in turn define the nature and strength of the signal initiated by the receiver. The ligands, natural hormones or drugs, Act by changing the directory of conformations explored by a receptor molecule. In principle, it should be possible to design new drugs based on the influence that they have on the conformation of a receiver and the effect of the latter on the cellular signals. In practice, the traditional structural techniques are however not photographing individual conformations and establish a link between the conformation and activity of a receptor. Purpose and methodology: this project is the application of biophysical techniques of advanced as individual molecules fluorescence microscopy to study the diversity and dynamics of the conformations of a model GPCR, the CCR5 receptor. The host laboratory studied CCR5 for more than 10 years and has developed a large number of potent inhibitors whose mechanisms of inhibition are atypical and not yet understood in detail. The effect of these inhibitors on mobility and aggregation of CCR5 will be evaluated in the membrane of living cells while conformational changes will be studied with the purified protein. The information thus obtained will be linked to other studies on cell biology and structure of CCR5 to begin to generate a dynamic structural model. Meaning: CCR5 is the main coreceptor used by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) to infect cells and the therapeutic target of many strategies for prevention and therapy of HIV/AIDS. The proposed experiments should help to explain the different mechanisms by which the class of inhibitors used blocks the entry of HIV into cells. Inhibition of CCR5 probably takes place through biological processes common to the entire family of the GPCR, which suggests that the new knowledge gained through this project will stimulate not only research to inhibit the entry of HIV by targeting CCR5, but provide also new General information on the biology of the GPCR.
