Lead back pain can be extremely disabling from the individual perspective, but it is also a social-economic problem due to the rapidly increasing demands on health care. Lumbar fusion? the surgical treatment of choice when conservative measures fail? is often associated with long-term complications such as adjacent segment degenerative disc disease and arthritis of the facet joints in conjunction. Motion-preserving remedies have not solved the problem. Lay summary although pain in the lower back are a complex and multifaceted problem, is an abnormal Biomechanics as a factor from the beginning away at finding solutions our ideas been involved by? normal load patterns and movements? are however limited due to (1) the impossibility of direct measurements of the forces in vivo, and (2) the lack of accurate, three-dimensional (3D) vertebral motion data of during dynamic function test. The limits of current in vivo experimental techniques make computer simulations of preferred choice to examine the Wirbelsäulenbiomechanik. During the last decade, a new biplanare x-ray based method (dynamic stereo-X-ray imaging (DSX)) has been designed and validated for direct recording of dynamic bone movements in 3D with accuracy in the lower part of the mm. This development offers the opportunity to obtain exact records of vertebral movements during functional tasks. The goal of this project is to develop, what experimental, dynamic an integrative method in vivo combined imaging techniques and computer-based techniques in a manner that is complementary to the gaps understanding the mechanics of damaged lumbar joints. The successful development of a validated virtual bench will allow even deeper and more detailed to investigate the biomechanical factors which influence the behavior of the lumbar spine. Additional findings concerning the boundaries of the lumbar Fusion will provide accurate kinematic data sets from the experimental procedures and improved simulation results of forces, tension and stress patterns (especially in regards to the fusion surgery). Therefore, this data can help improve better diagnostic and therapeutic solutions for degenerative conditions of the spine and the design of future implants to develop.
