Lead topological insulators are newly discovered materials that have metallic States in surface, but are insulated in the heart. These materials are very promising for future applications. However, the major problem with the current material is the conductivity of the three-dimensional States overshadows that of metallic surface States. It is therefore important to separate these two contributions, what is the purpose of this project. Lay summary topological insulators are of insulating materials in their heart, but who have a thin layer of sturdy metallic States in surface. These surface States, newly discovered, are caused by the non-trivial topology of the electronic structure of the States of heart. Consisting primarily of heavy elements, these materials are characterized by a large spin-orbit coupling, which leads to an inversion of the electronic band within the band gap. These compounds are also an excellent example of a State?ordered without any symmetry breaking.  Well most of these materials are known and have been widely used for over half a century - especially for their excellent thermoelectric properties - the existence of States of metal surface was discovered only a few years ago. Shortly after their discovery, it has become clear that in the future these compounds could be used in many electronic components. To do this, it will be necessary to develop high-quality materials. More specifically, it is essential to understand and control/monitor the dynamics of loads - the key to any future application.  The purpose of this research is to improve the understanding of the dynamics of loads in insulators topological and other related materials. We'll look at using spectroscopy and electron transport, the signatures of the States of surface in topological materials. The purpose is to clarify the role of three-dimensional States in the dynamics of loads in this type of material. A comprehensive study of topological insulators will be conducted by varying various experimental parameters, such as temperature, pressure, magnetic and chemical composition. The basic idea is to bridge the gap between the properties expected and actual materials.  
