Lead Lay summary This project is about Number theory. It concerns two different parts. The goal of the first one is to better understand the arithmetic properties of transcendental functions. The second one would contribute to the search of effectivity in diophantine geometry. A classical problem in Number theory is to study the set of algebraic points on which an analytic function takes algebraic values. We are interested here on the cardinality of such a set when the function is transcendental (The exponential is an example of such kind of functions). In this case, this set could be empty, finite, countable, uncountable or infinite. For studying this set we use the notion of degree and height of an algebraic number. The height is a notion of size which generalize the absolute value. In this project we are interested in some questions concerning (i) the optimality and uniformity of some previous bounds of the cardinality of such a set (this concerns general results as well as concrete examples); (ii) some generalisations with derivatives; (iii) the problem in higher dimension. Diophantine geometry is the study of integral and rational solutions to polynomials equations. Related natural questions are the following. Is there any rational or integral point? If yes, infinitely many or finitely many? The second part of the project develops around three fundamental finiteness theorems of this branch: the theorems of Mordell-Weil, Siegel and Faltings (Mordell's conjecture). These theorems give a qualitative answer to the questions below. An important aspect of them which remains an open problem, is the problem of the effectivity: if there are finitely many points, how to find them? An argument which often returns in Diophantine geometry and which, in particular related to the theorems mentioned above, is that of the coverings of algebraic varieties. The idea is to translate the problem to another object easier to understand. In this project, we propose to study étale coverings from two (complementary) points of view, in the case of curves. The remainder of the project connects different branches of Number theory (arithmetic, geometric and differential properties of the algebraic varieties) and rests on conjectures certainly strong, in the more general setting, but from now on classical and which are the object of several investigations: the abc-conjecture of Masser-Oesterlé, the conjecture of Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer.
