Lead Lay summary The proposed study consists in a detailed description and a new analysis of the functions of the verb in Old Egyptian. It will be in continuation of ongoing personal research on related issues in the Middle Egyptian verb. Old Egyptian, the language of the Old Kingdom (ca. 2700-2150 BCE), is the earliest stage of Egyptian-Coptic (ca. 3200 BCE - ca. 1300 CE) in which continuous texts were committed to writing, thus allowing for full-scale linguistic analysis. The preserved corpus includes internally diverse bodies of texts such as royal funerary compositions (?Pyramid Texts?), non-royal inscriptions (?funerary self-presentations?), documentary genres (such as letters, decrees, legal documents), captions to pictorial scenes (?Reden und Rufe?), and personal names. At present Old Egyptian remains the least well described and understood stage of the language, despite its importance as the vehicle of major productions in early Egyptian culture and history. Most past research in the Old Egyptian verb has been devoted to reconstructing the inventory of its inflectional categories. Functional aspects on the other hand have mostly been addressed within the broader frame of Earlier Egyptian, i.e. of Old and Middle Egyptian combined (ca. 2700-1300 BCE), generally with an emphasis on Middle Egyptian. In addition, the study of the Earlier Egyptian verb itself has been defined by successive interpretive models, often privileging one functional dimension to the detriment of other ones also involved. This has hindered an integrated analysis, and further resulted in a fragmentation of the overall field of Earlier Egyptian studies. Meanwhile, major gaps have remained in the detailed functional description of individual forms and constructions. Moreover, issues relating to the very nature of the textual evidence at hand?of particular consequence in the third millennium BCE?have been largely overlooked in past research. The study will be the first to address the functions of Old Egyptian verb specifically, and to do so by including all types of written evidence available. The concentration on one period in time will be compounded by a full exploitation of the internal diversity of the corpus, capitalizing on the diverse genres, registers, and discourse-situations documented. The study will focus on those issues that presently remain least understood, and for which the extant written evidence permits significant progress to be made. These include: [i.] the anterior paradigm (with fully asserted events); [ii.] aspectual-temporal profiles of various forms and patterns; [iii.] alternations of forms with low-transitivity events in the anterior domain; [iv.] the functions of the long stem (mrr-); [v.] the functions of the discourse-auxiliary iw; [vi.] constructions downgrading the information status of events; [vii.] specific temporalities in the ritual and funerary spheres, from which the bulk of the surviving textual evidence derives. The first part of the proposed research will be descriptive, consisting in a detailed examination of the above issues along dimensions and empirical criteria defined in the course of previous personal research. In addition to data already collected by the applicant, further data can be derived from past studies and lexicon-based research tools. Most data, however, are only to be gained through repeated rounds of text-reading across the overall Old Egyptian corpus. These will be carried out jointly by the applicant and a research assistant. In subsequent stages, the functional categories involved are to be analyzed in details. Relevant categories are from multiple domains, such as aspect, enunciation and information-structure, inter-clausal integration, and syntactic status. Previous approaches have tended to privilege one or the other dimensions, thereby failing to account for the complexity of the issue at hand. In aiming for an integrated model, grammatical meaning is to be analyzed more precisely, in individual forms and in constructions in which such forms are used. Relevant functional categories are then to be articulated to each other in ways yet to be defined, depending on forms and constructions. The analysis is further to address the degrees to which the component parts of some constructions are syntactically bound, or more freely combined with each other, with various effects on meaning. In providing a first ever detailed description and analysis of the functions of the Old Egyptian verb, the proposed study will fill a major gap in the field. With a perspective on Earlier Egyptian as whole, such integrated study will also indirectly renew the study of Middle Egyptian itself, presently characterized by its fragmentation of approaches. The study will further provide the philologist with a detailed description of the forms, uses, and constructions that remain most unclear in their range of meanings, and thus possible translations. In addressing issues of genre and temporality in the ritual, funerary, and monumental spheres, it will contribute to the interpretation of the texts themselves. In a longer term perspective, a study of the functions of the verb will be a first step toward a modern reference grammar of Old Egyptian, much needed for philology, academic teaching, and further linguistic research. The sole exponent of the genre, from the middle of the past century, is now badly outdated.
