Lead Lay summary The ability to reason about objects in space is a fundamental aspect of everyday cognition. In order to interact with our environment, we must be able to represent objects and anticipate their movements and transformations. Progress in various school disciplines seems to be strongly tied to people's ability to reason about spatial configurations and their properties, and research on spatial skills has often revealed wide individual differences. Fortunately, mounting evidence suggests that we are able to train spatial thinking. However, in order to develop purposeful and well-directed interventions, we need to have a better understanding of the emergence of individual differences, the early developments, and the consequences of spatial skills. A first aim of the present project is to take a comprehensive look at how different mental spatial transformation abilities are related by testing children around the age of 5 years. Analyses of individual differences and correlations among different tests will give us valuable information on how children understand basic spatial transformations before entering school. A second aim of this project is to take an in-depth look at the development of mental object rotation ability. To date, there are only a few studies that have investigated mental rotation in children younger than 5 years. In order to investigate the early emergence and developmental trajectories of mental rotation, we will develop and refine paradigms for research with young children. A third aim of this project is to gain a better understanding of how individual differences in early spatial transformation performance contribute to children's school achievement and cognitive development throughout early childhood. Thus, the proposed study will include a longitudinal approach, in which we will assess children's later cognitive skills and academic achievement. This project will thus provide a rich and comprehensive picture of the development of mental spatial transformation abilities. By incorporating longitudinal data, we can gain deeper insight into their stability or malleability over the course of development. Through utilizing a number of cross-sectional measures we will gain a broader understanding of individual differences in various spatial transformation abilities. It is crucial to add to our understanding of the ways in which relative strengths or weaknesses in different spatial transformation skills are related, in order to identify children at risk of developing delays at a young age, and to create tools for assessment and early intervention.
