Lead Lay summary The direct focus of the application is on cancer therapeutics for development of innovative metallodrugs. However the likely impact of this project is substantially wider, since metal complexes are promising drugs in many other therapeutic areas. Recent achievements in the development of metal-based therapeutics demonstrate that this is a potentially prosperous area for inorganic chemistry, and have stimulated considerable interest. Metal complexes represent today an important part of the arsenal of pharmacological agents. For example, various platinum(II) complexes, have found extensive application in cancer treatment during the last 25 years. Within this frame, rational-design of metal-based drugs has become increasingly important. There is today a rather general consensus that it is crucial to acquire specific information on the underlying biochemical processes of a certain pharmacological action, in order to rationally direct the discovery of novel compounds through a ?mechanism oriented? approach. In the case of cancer, DNA has been considered the primary target for platinum compounds. However, for the second-generation anticancer metal drugs, the mechanisms of their observed biological actions remain poorly understood. Remarkably, preliminary experimental evidence suggests that the mechanisms of action of non-platinum metallodrugs are very different from those of classical platinum compounds and might involve selective modification of some crucial proteins. The proposed research is aimed at gaining insights into fundamental aspects of cellular response to metallodrugs. The methodological approach is highly interdisciplinary, chemistry, biophysics, molecular biology, medicine and pharmacology being the main fields of expertise of the responsible and of the host institution. In this respect, we aim also at establishing a general strategy for drug development with the implementation of high resolution biophysical techniques coupled with pharmacological methods. The main goal of the present project is to determine the mechanisms of both classical and innovative metallodrugs, with particular attention to anticancer agents, through an integrated in vitro approach. The tested compounds will include platinum, ruthenium and gold metal complexes. Extensive characterisation of the selected compounds and of their reactivity with proteins will be carried out according to chemical and bioinorganic methods based on the application of advanced physico-chemical techniques (mass spectrometry, X-ray crystallography, NMR etc). Biological methods will be employed to evaluate the antiproliferative effects and the enzyme activity inhibitory properties of each selected metal complex.
