Lead this project sets the late poetic works of John Milton (1608-1674), one of the giants of the English Literary Canon, in the context of the Visual culture of the English Reformation. In particular interested call a social and theological debate of the early 17th century, with regard to the representation of God and his saints, which I collectively Caroline image debate. Lay summary content and aim of the research project in the churches of England during the 16th century learned iconoclasm, see the late 1620s and the 1630s years a return of Biblical figures and scenes.  This reintroduction of Church jewelry however resulted in a renewed wave of iconoclasm shortly before the outbreak of the English civil war. The Visual power of Milton's paradise lost, a biblical epic commonplace has become in the literary criticism written by a blind poet. But debate the implications of the Caroline image of Milton's late poetry (paradise lost, paradise regained, and Samson Agonistes) remain in the largely unexplored. This project is aimed to address this gap in the Milton studies and to shed new light on Milton's poetry and heterodox theology. At the same time, also made a contribution to the history of Visual culture in the Reformation should be made, which is directly related to the Protestant Switzerland. If God is us only through the Scriptures, how can the Puritan Milton justify his highly visual, theatrical and epic treatment of the first three chapters of Genesis? As he conceptualized the relationship between the poet, his imagery and their spiritual models? Light it sheds on Milton's understanding of the human Creator God and the human tendency to the idolatry? What does this tell us about Milton's view of the Dreifaltichkeit, about his views of the original sin, free will, and the concept of grace?   Scientific and social context will appear quite contemporary Milton relating of Caroline image to examine the debate and the accompanying iconoclasm. As two exhibitions held recently (Berne 2000, Karlsruhe, 2002) and a variety of publications attest, is iconoclasm (or what Bruno Latour?)Iconoclash? calls), a highly relevant issue. After the destruction of 9/11, after the devastation of religious buildings in Timbuktu in 2012, for example, is the study of recurrent human inclination to destroy images and again establishing a pressing scientific concerns.
