Lead the war of thirty years (1618-1648) touched more or less straightforwardly territories situated on the borders between Swiss body, Holy Roman Empire and France, either the bishopric of Basel and the County of Neuchâtel. This research highlights collective memberships mobilized in these territories during the war, and shows the impact of political and denominational borders that divided them. Lay summary in this research, I m? interested in a decisive period of l? European history, the thirty years war (1618-48), fundamental in terms of crystallization of the political and confessional boundaries. The terms of this traumatic pregnancy, especially with respect to their implications for political and religious identities, are however still partly unexplored; c? is especially the case for Switzerland, where the 17th century is still the poor relation of historical research. My research aims to understand the plurality, but also prioritization, with different memberships, and d? study l? inside the social and cultural dimensions of the process described "from the top" in terms of confessionalisation and d? emergence of national monarchies.  To do this, I use different methods. In the first place, in order to highlight l? individual experience of the war, such as? it is mediated by social, religious and territorial membership j? will analyse personal writings such as newspapers, family Chronicles and matches. A second approach is to change d? scale and points of view, which is l? a major acquired from the micro-histoire. Finally, I put in? work a comparative method by studying two territories located in l? Jura, on the borders between the Holy Roman Empire, the Switzerland and France, namely l? bishopric of Basel and the County of Neuchâtel.  The research has led to significant results: she first revealed in the bishopric of Basel a real border inland between the territories of the bishopric (the current canton of Jura), belonging to the Holy Roman Empire and Catholic, which were occupied by the belligerents, and the southern territories (Biel and the current Bernese Jura), part of the body Swiss and protestants, who were protected by the Swiss neutralitylike the County of Neuchâtel. At these different experiences of the conflict were differing memberships, and solidarity with the opposing camps. In this regard, the war has strengthened border. But it has also contributed to their excess: in the North of the bishopric of Basel, some actors have attempted closer body Swiss for more security, while the Catholic Territories residents took refuge in Protestant areas. Therefore, the war had an ambiguous effect; She also has highlighted borders pre-existing and which are maintained in the long term. 
