Lead this project is examining vestibular and multisenorische Mechanismsen of the twill - and Selbstwahrnehmg with clinical, imaging and behavioural methods. The goal is to develop non-invasive therapeutic procedures for patients with a disorder of the physical Selbsterlevens with the gained insights. Lay summary content and target: A growing number of neuroscientific studies deals with the question of how the dynamic, multisensory representation of the body forms a basis for the self experience in the central nervous system. The project is aimed to understand these processes in order to develop in the longer term more effective therapies for patients with disorders of the body and self experience (such as phantom limb pain) absorbed. While attempting to change the body experience through non-invasive sensory stimulation. A focus will be placed on the stimulation of the equilibrium organ, there various times shows that the experience of the body in patients can be changed by vestibular Stimulaton. The mechanisms are however still largely unclear. Methods: In the project, different clinical, imaging and behavioural methods are applied in healthy individuals and patients. First is the aim to describe the contribution of the vestibular system in the physical experience of the self. Therefore, patients with vestibular deficits in experimental paradigms to the body and self experience be investigated on the one hand. On the other hand, the vestibular functions in patients with interference in the physical self be tested after a right-sided brain lesion.  In addition, we will try to improve therapeutic experimental paradigms of multi-sensory stimulation with modified physical self (E.g. mirror therapy for phantom pain) through functional imaging (Neurofeedback) methods. Meaning: We expect that the results will make an important contribution to the understanding of the neural mechanisms of the self experience and whose errors and take it therapeutically relevant findings. 
