Lead Lay summary Cognitive disorders are severely distressing to both patients and their families. They are responsible for 5?10% of health care costs and are a leading cause of referrals to pediatric, neurological and genetic counseling services. One of the most prevalent and severe cognitive disorders is intellectual disability. It affects 1-3% of the population and yet despite its high prevalence, intellectual disability is also one of the least understood and the least investigated of all health problems. Furthermore, it is estimated that genetic mutations account for half of the currently undiagnosed cases, and despite recent successes in identifying some of the mutations responsible, it has been suggested that up to 1,000 more genes remain to be identified. The general aim of my project is to identify novel human cognition genes by screening abnormal morphology of the mouse brain. The screen focuses on the hippocampus and cortex as it allows assessing simultaneously two regions of the brain essential for higher order cognitive function. I have two approaches; the first is a genome-wide approach. I will use mouse knockout programs currently underway, through a well-established collaboration with the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, as a fast and cheap means to find novel cognition genes across the genome. A pilot study of abnormal brain morphology has already yielded success with the identification of two genes: Chd7 (Chromodomain Helicase Dna binding protein 7) and Wdr47 (WD repeat domain 47), both associated with corpus callosum agenesis in the mouse. Mutations in Chd7 have previously been reported to be the underlying pathological cause in a majority of patients with CHARGE syndrome. Identification of known Chd7 gene acts as a proof that the screen can detect abnormality in the mouse that translates into human pathology. There is very limited literature on Wdr47 , and its role in the development of cognitive disorders and its possible role in axon outgrowth guidance remains to be investigated. Genes identified in the mouse will then be screened for deleterious mutations in relevant human cohorts with intellectual disability, and tested in other functional studies. The second approach is to apply mouse knockout resources to well-defined genetic intervals involving intellectual disability such as the 16p11.2 microdeletion syndrome. The typical 16p11.2 deletion is 520 kilobases in size and encompasses twenty-eight genes. Yet the specific gene(s) affecting brain function in this locus remain(s) to be identified and can be addressed using single gene knockout models. In brief I propose a multidisciplinary approach to advance our understanding of the genetics of intellectual disability and other cognitive disorders, ultimately aiming to improve diagnosis and treatment. The proposed research integrates large-scale mouse knockout analysis and is grounded in a strong multidisciplinary perspective, combining mouse and human genetics, and developmental neurobiology.
