Lead Lay summary the project concerns the figure of Melchiorre Cesarotti, writer, translator, theorist of the language and literature of the 18th century. The aim is to give a complete edition of his? language works and overall interpretation of its reflection on the language: probably the most advanced and influential in the Italy of the enlightenment. The analysis of language was a central theme for the lights. The language actually offered to the philosophers of the 18th century a path in two fundamental problems such as knowledge and identity. The debate on language is so throughout the century cosmopolitan and vibrant: rich in exchanges, influences, controversies, ideas. Cesarotti is one of the protagonists of this debate. Applying the theoretical proposals of Condillac, brushes, Leibniz, etc., it gives a penetrating analysis of the Italian linguistic situation, but also a new and original twist on these same theories. Its linguistic reflection is entrusted. The first editions have long been exhausted, while the lessons (in latin) were published partially only in 1810, and are almost entirely unknown to the studies. By offering a full publication of these texts, translation with adnotation, the project proposes first put at the disposal of researchers from important work in a philologically reliable form materials; the adnotation and interpretation should also guarantee a reading finally comprehensive and proportionate of this genuine classic of Italian linguistics. An international symposium will go complete the framework of the historical-critical interpretation, focusing especially the theme of the European roots of the ideas of Cesarotti. The reflection of the 18th century laid the foundations of modern Linguistics: his interest is therefore not limited to the history of ideas, but also concerns the theoretical linguistics. Linguistics is actually a discipline scientist sui generis, whose progress is strictly linked to historical reflection: as in philosophy, Linguistics often happens that a return on the thinking of the past can help to better define the conceptual tools and even the problems on which we work. The project fits so in an environment of very vital and rich studies, and as part of a discipline (history of Linguistics) in full development, with a now well recognized autonomous status in the international community of researchers.
