Lead the formalism of quantum mechanics was developed in the 1930s, but counter-intuitive behaviors resulting continue to stimulate technological innovation while lifting metaphysical and philosophical issues. Experimentally, quantum phenomena were especially studied with particles (photons) massless or individual atoms. It is therefore a fundamental and technological interest d? extend these tests to the massive and macroscopic objects. Lay summary the micromechanical resonators coupled with optical cavities are promising systems for these studies. Indeed, as the photons are carrying d? a pulse, they can be used to monitor and measure the movement? mechanical objects. This interaction can be magnified by designing to high quality factor optical cavities coupled with a vibration mode. Radiation pressure can be used to cool (= cushion) or amplify the mechanical movement and to measure the actual temperature of the mechanical oscillator. In the quantum regime, the movement is restricted to take discrete values and these quanta of mechanical excitation are called phonons. The observation of this discretization, and in particular the creation and detection of a single quantum of movement, would be a fascinating example of quantum phenomenon to the? work in a macroscopic and solid object. To achieve this goal, we will focus on nano-beams in Silicon engraved with Photonic crystals. These systems are optical and mechanical modes very confined and collocated with the Silicon platform-related additional benefits: potential scalability and mature manufacturing technologies and to integrate in complex quantum devices. The proposed experiment will take place in a cryogenic environment and uses unique photon counting techniques to generate a single phonon with a projective measure optically. After a pulse laser excitation, detection of a single photon in the cavity mode will announce the creation of a phonon in the previously cooled mechanical mode. Finally, a laser pulse will convert this phonon in a photon. A measure of autocorrelation on the photon in the cavity will demonstrate the absence of double coincidence, revealing the nature non-classic and discreet of the generated mechanical condition
