Lead the aim of this project it is better to understand how a honey bee State workers use information from their environment and adapt their behavior based on this information. In addition, it will be investigated how these rules of conduct affecting the success of the whole insect State. Summary content and the aim of the research project insect States require lay to provide an efficient Organization for best collective performance. Various groups of workers are responsible for the various work that must be done in a colony. These tasks include for example brood care, colony defense or the search for food. Insect States show an impressive ability to sudden changes in the environment through positive and negative feedback mechanisms that lead to the redistribution of the workers, to respond. Attractive and inhibiting pheromone during foraging in ants or the waggle dance when bees are examples of such positive and negative feedback. The key to a successful organization and regulation of the collective work is the ability of workers to respond to information from the local environment. The goal of this project is it better to understand how workers use information from their environment and adapt their behavior based on this information. This code of conduct and its consequences for the success of the insect State will be investigated in the field of collective food collecting in honey bees (APIs mellifera and Meliponini). A bee has basically three options to find a Futterstandort. She can use the location information of a waggle dance of a nest comrade (social information), you can search individually (exploration) a new food source or she can search feed locations that already knows the bee (private information). Scientific context various experiments with honey bees in the Switzerland and tropical honey bees in Brazil are planned to examine how environmental conditions affect the success of these different strategies. In addition, simulation models are used, which complement the experiments.
