Lead Lay summary Perceptual learning and expertise: Tracking down the distinction between processing of faces and of non-face objects has led to two competing accounts: domain-specific and process specific. The domain-specific account proposes that there is a discrete system, or module, in the cortex used exclusively for face processing (the fusiform face area), and another system or systems for object processing (e.g. the lateral occipital area), with no interdependency between the two. The contrasting view suggests this same face system is, in fact, best described by the kind of processing occurring there, rather than by face stimuli per se. This ?process-specific?account maintains that under some circumstances, non-face objects are processed like faces, as appears to be the case for objects of ?perceptual expertise?. Just as faces elicit FFA activation, cars elicit FFA activation in car experts. The same holds for birds experts, or even for subjects that were extensively trained on an artifical object class. At the current stage of research, there is little understanding of the underlying neural mechanisms supporting this learning process. My thesis aims for a deeper understanding of these neural mechanisms using electrophysiological and imaging techniques on the monkey brain. The following questions are addressed: 1) What changes occur at a neural level during the process of a subject becoming an expert? And, 2) Do such changes occur selectively ? or preferentially ? in regions of the brain associated with face processing? Functional MRI localizers for face and object activity will be conducted in Rhesus macaques. Based on regions of activation, subsequent multi-site, multi-electrode recordings will be made as monkeys perform a delayed-match-to-sample task requiring similarity judgements (discrimination) for members of a homogeneous object class. In addition, monkeys will perform a dishabituation task to determine whether standard criteria for identifying perceptual expertise have been met. Using chronic parallel recording techniques, the degree of individuation within each learning session, or across several learning sessions can be tracked; moreover, I hope to uncover the relationship (if any) between the neural representation for faces and the emerging neural code for objects of expertise.
