Lead Lay summary Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic disorder of the central nervous system characterized by a dynamic sequence of inflammatory, restorative and degenerative processes. Previous studies have shown the potential of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to better understand MS physiopathology and to perform diagnosis. More recent MRI studies aim at providing biomarkers of disease progression and response to therapy. However, the correlation between MRI findings and clinical deficits in MS patients remains insufficient, indicating that a more comprehensive understanding of the disease and its evolution is needed. Recent advances in MRI technology provide higher sensitivity and new contrasts. This opens further perspectives, especially to investigate (a) the early stages of MS and (b) disease-related alterations in complex brain structures like the cerebellum. Interestingly, cerebellar alterations have been poorly studied, despite they may strongly affect patients' outcome and could provide valuable markers of disease. In the present project, we will investigate MS patients at very early stages of the disease and follow them over 2 years by using the following approaches: 1.) exploiting advanced MRI techniques to characterize the alterations of the cerebellum in MS. Using multi-contrast 3D high resolution whole brain MRI, we aim at obtaining higher sensitivity to lesion count and investigating lesion properties, to identify imaging markers that complement conventional MRI procedures in MS diagnosis and disease monitoring, 2.) merging MRI markers of cerebellar pathology with the alterations observed in the brain hemispheres in order to develop a global radiological score considering lesions count and tissue characteristics as well as clinical scores. Serial imaging and clinical data of a 2 year interval will be used to extend the model to predict disease evolution, and 3.) combining the global clinico-radiological score with a biological marker of MS, the Epstein Barr Virus (EBV). Numerous works have shown that EBV virus may play a triggering role in MS and we hypothesize that combining the global score and biological markers will further increase accuracy for monitoring the disease and improve the understanding of the physiopathology of cortical lesions. In summary, our project will apply state of the art MRI resources to investigate unexplored aspects of MS physiopathology in early stages of the disease, evaluate these aspects as potential markers of disease and develop a combined score from MRI, biological tests and clinical analysis for disease classification, evolution and prognosis.
