Lead Lay summary The evolution of Latin GN is a major issue of Romance and Italian historical phonetics. In this project the relationships between the different outcomes of GN will be considered, starting from the pronunciation of GN in Latin and following its evolution in Mediaeval Latin and Early Romance until today. Four different tendencies can be observed in the evolution of GN, i.e. palatalization (ñ in Italian and all Western Romance languages, -in- in Engadinese and in most Southern Italian dialects), velarization (-un- in a few dialects of Southern Basilicata, Northern Calabria and Puglia), labialization (-mn- in Rumanian), and assimilation (-nn- in Sardinian). These tendencies have been variously explained, among others, by Lausberg, who postulates an Early Romance pronunciation of GN resulting either in spirantization (GN -*yn-) or palatalization (GN -in-), and by Merlo, who supposes that in Southern Italy an epenthetic vowel would have broken up the GN cluster already in Latin, thus giving GiN -in- and GuN -un-. However, both explanations do not take into account the fact that, according to Indo-European linguistics, the first segment of the GN cluster was not pronounced as a voiced velar stop, but as a nasal velar [n]. The aim of the project is to test the different hypotheses that have been given by following the evolution of the GN cluster from Classical Latin to the contemporary Romance languages and dialects. By collecting a large number of data from old and contemporary dialects and analysing them by means of experimental phonetics and philology, a possibly comprehensive explanation of the different outcomes of GN will be proposed. The project intends to contribute not only to Romance dialectology, but also to Indo-European linguistics and generally to historical phonetics. Moreover, by analysing the distribution of the different outcomes of GN in the Romania and in the Latin borrowings of non-Romance languages, it will help to reconstruct the linguistic history of Europe from antiquity until today. Finally, it will test the most recent theories on language change by applying them to a highly problematic issue, which apparently cannot be satisfyingly explained in terms of traditional historical phonetics.
