Lead Lay summary I. Background and Aims The aim of our project is to apply bioremediation - the use of indigenous soil microbes to clean up contamination - to immobilize chromium (Cr) contamination at two field sites in Cantons Thun and Ticino, Switzerland.  Chromium is a toxic and mobile heavy metal contaminant of ground water, and the use of microbes to remediate Cr is a relatively new technology that has not been applied extensively in Switzerland.  The reduction of soluble and mobile hexavalent chromium, Cr(VI), to its reduced form, Cr(III), is the remediation strategy normally employed.  This Cr reduction may occur if the growth of microbes is stimulated via the addition of a reduced carbon source, such as lactate, acetate, or molasses.  The product, Cr(III), is often assumed to precipitate as relatively insoluble hydroxide solid;, however there is evidence that other, more labile forms of Cr(III) may form.  Combining laboratory and field studies, we aim to determine and characterize the reactivity of these products. II.  Field and Laboratory Methods To determine the reduced Cr(III) products formed in the field, glass columns filled with sediments from the two Cr-contaminated field sites in Thun and Ticino will be deployed into groundwater wells at the sites.  These field sites are being actively managed by two Swiss remediation firms.  Pumps fixed at the surface will be used to continuously feed these columns with groundwater, thus capturing the seasonal variability in water chemistry and microbial community.  A dilute solution of acetate will also be pumped into the columns to stimulate the growth of microorganisms in the columns, and cause the bioreduction of Cr(VI) to Cr(III).   We will deploy several replicate columns into each well, allowing the recovery of columns over the course of months and years.  In this way we can determine which Cr(III) products form, and how they evolve over a relatively long period.  A parallel series of columns studies is planned in the laboratory, where solution chemistry can be more carefully controlled. State-of-the-art techniques will be used to characterize the Cr(III) products.  X-ray absorption spectroscopy at two beam lines at the Swiss Light Source (microXAS and superXAS) will give structural information about the products, and their location relative to other elements and minerals in the field sediments.  High resolution transmission electron microscopy, to be conducted at EPF Lausanne, will allow us to image the Cr(III) products at the atomic scale. III.  Impact This project utilizes personnel and resources from both industry and academia to determine if bioremediation is a feasible strategy for Cr contamination in Switzerland.  The results of the field studies will directly aid in the remediation of two contaminated sites in Switzerland.  The detailed characterization and stability studies of the Cr(III) products at the Swiss Light Source and EPF Lausanne will be of more general use to scientists and engineers considering bioremediation as a strategy for chromium remediation.
