Lead Lay summary Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) and natural killer cells release granzyme and perforin from cytotoxic granules into the immune synapse to induce apoptosis of virus infected or tumor target cells. Granzyme A and B trigger distinct pathways of cell death. Granzyme A activates a caspase-independent apoptotic pathway. Granzyme A induces mitochondrial damage characterized by superoxide anion production and loss of the mitochondrial transmembrane potential without disrupting the mitochondrial outer membrane integrity and also causes single-stranded DNA damage by activating two nucleases in the SET complex. GzmB cleaves its substrates after aspartic acid residue (like the caspases) and induces both caspase-dependent and caspase-independent cell death. In the caspase-dependent pathway, mitochondrial functions are altered as evidenced by the loss of mitochondrial transmembrane potential and the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). The mitochondrial outer membrane (MOM) is disrupted, resulting in the release of apoptogenic factors such as cytochrome c, HtrA2/Omi, endonuclease G, Smac/Diablo and apoptosis inducing factor (AIF) that are otherwise located in the mitochondrial intermembrane space. GzmB also induces mitochondrial damage independently of the caspases. To date, the research on mitochondrial-dependent apoptosis has focused on mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization (MOMP), leaving unclear whether the generation of ROS is incidental or essential to the execution of apoptosis. Since GzmA and GzmB induce cell death in a ROS-dependent manner, we hypothesize that oxygen free radicals are central to the execution of programmed cell death induced by the cytotoxic granules. Therefore, the goal of this proposal is to dissect the key molecular events triggered by ROS that lead to granzyme-induced cell death. One goal of the proposal is to investigate the mechanism by which granzyme B induces reactive oxygen species in order to activate cell death. To initiate mitochondrial damage granzyme A enters the mitochondrial matrix. Another goal of this proposal is to define the mechanisms by which granzymes enter this organelle. A final goal is to understand the physiological significance of the reactive oxygen species in the process cytotoxic granules-mediated cell death.
