Lead pain is a medical problem of foreground. The available drugs have limited effectiveness, i.e. have adverse side effects. It is therefore important to develop new approaches for the management of pain. In this project a simple model organism is used to identify new targets for the treatment of pain. Lay summary the aim of this research is d? bring a new light on the mechanisms of temperature sensation and pain with l? use d? genetic and cellular approaches in Caenorhabditis elegans (c. elegans). This model organism has many advantages, including availability d? a complete map of connectivity of its nervous system, efficient genetic methods and behaviours stereotyped d? avoidance of harmful heat (providing a simple d? evaluate their nociceptive response). During my postdoctoral work, j? have developed new behavioural tests to (1) quantify l? avoidance of harmful heat and (2) a screen high-throughput for isolating mutant animals with altered response. J? discovered several new genes involved in nociception. The specific goals of the project are: A) describe the genetic network controlling l? avoidance of harmful heat. For this purpose, I will (1) define the genetic interactions between the new genes involved in nociception and (2) extend genetic screening to discover additional genes. (B) characterize the underlying neuronal circuitry. To this end, I'm going to (1) identify the neurons that are required for l? avoidance of harmful heat by experiments d? neural ablation and (2) determine if their activation or inhibition is sufficient to trigger a behavioural response with l? use of channels and transmembrane carriers light-activated and expressed in transgenic animals. Characterize the genetic and neural pathways involved in nociception is a prerequisite to a beneficial use of the model c. elegans in the field. The project will provide a solid basis for a wider research project into the future. Since the mechanisms of nociception could well be preserved with higher organisms, l? proposed approach could provide clues for new therapeutic approaches to treatment of pain.
