Lead In this project will develop new porous media for tissue regeneration with a focus on surface modification of bio-degradable supports. Innovative coatings based on bio-compatible polymers coupled to specific proteins and growth factors will be developed and applied on polyester-based media. These coatings or coatings will be Functionalized in a controlled manner so as to create environments that present a continuous compositional diversity media interface themselves. This composition will cause a specific response from stem cells complemented the formulations, which can then differentiate into distinct tissues in certain positions within the media. This strategy will facilitate the regeneration of osteo-cartilaginous giunziono to replace diseased or damaged joints similar in patients. Lay summary regenerative medicine aims to produce anatomical parts substituents damaged materials through the use of cells, biological and bio-compatible and bio-degradable. Modern methods of bio-engineering using stem cells matched to sophisticated plastics as supports. These strategies issue promising developments in terms of performance and provide products with high durability and compatibility with the physiological conditions. This project will focus on the development of polymer-based organic modifiers to be applied on the surface of polymeric supports. These modifiers form of uniform coatings with chemical and physical characteristics are determined, such as to influence and direct the behavior of stem cells that approximate or adhere to the surface. The media used as a basis for subsequent amendments and for cell cultures are based on three-dimensional stratified microfibres assembled by 3D printing. Poliossazoline substances will be applied in the form of? coatings?, chemically modified to submit sites for proteins or, Alternatively, specific growth factors designed to direct the differentiation of cells in the desired tissue. Methods of controlled deposition of proteins and growth factors will favour the formation of gradients of composition of biomolecules inside its support. Specifically three dimensional gradients of concentration of different protein can induce a different answer in specific positions within the media. The emulation of natural diversity of ECM in three dimensions will ensure a response specific to spatially cell look in the formation of a complex tissue (bone-cartilage type).
