Lead Lay summary this project focuses on active physicians in the course of the Papal States and the Spanish kingdoms of 1520 to 1650. They will be analyzed in their different functions and l? together with their relationship with d? other contemporary actors – scientists, politicians, religious. These doctors were interlocutors recognized by the power in different areas but also mediators between social, geographical and scholarly backgrounds. They were also bearers of the methods and practices that provided key d? access not only to the knowledge of the human body, but to that of the natural world. Our initial hypothesis is that? this social group autour emerges a privileged space d? analysis of the process of science of the human body and the natural world that is taking place in l? European area of first modernity. The project s? articulated around three main surveys that define each other. The first concerns l? therapeutic activity of doctors present in the Roman and Spanish courts. The second considers their role in the process? Organization and return of knowledge to the world, ongoing d development within these same courses. The third door on the way in which the medical elite regulated various aspects of the social body intervening in its areas of specific competence, the human body. Putting in? work of these three axes will be done on several levels, levels which also correspond to the different phases of the research: 1. commitment d? a vast investigation prosopographic compared dealing with members of the? medical elite? doctors of the different courses? that Act on the territories of the Papal States and the Spanish Crown from 1520 to 1650. 2 realization d? an atlas compared systems of knowledge places whose different cards aim to seize places d? activity of doctors, the internal dynamics of traffic to these spaces and their reciprocal interactions. 3 analysis of the systems of production of scientific knowledge, through l? study of l? development of knowledge, specific practices and their operative value according to the societies in which they s? part. L? this project is through a dialogue sandwiched between history of medicine, history of science and modern history and mobilization d? a heterogeneous body of sources (normative and institutional sources, manuscript and printed sources produced by physicians, non-medical documentation likely d? offer an outside perspective on medicine, Visual sources...). These sources will be interviewed from d? methodological tools differentiated interacting differently according to the surveys. With this research, we propose d? several objectives: analyze the epistemological options contributing to the constitution d? a scientific look on the body and nature, to consider as the resultant d? complex equilibria between the various forces in presence, scholarly, political, religious; explore the figure of the 'doctor' in all its complexity and thus redefine the figure of the European scholar of the first modernity; contribute, through medicine, to reflect on l? historicization of the concept of science, but also to redefine the contours d? a political and cultural l geography?Modern Europe. A number of concrete results are expected. They will converge in a monograph, as well as in d? other scientific publications where certain specific aspects of the project will be developed. Finally, partial or final research results will be made available to the scientific community through the online database and l? atlas of places of knowledge mentioned.
