Lead Lay summary in Clinical Neurology, brain injury in an adult patient results most often by persistent motor deficits. L? ambition of this project is to quantify the physiological changes in the brain area injured in nonhuman primates with d? treatment promoting neuronal regeneration. The resulting motor deficits d? strokes or brain injuries are mostly permanent, the central nervous system of adult mammals (brain, spinal cord) n? not having the possibility to regenerate. One of the factors responsible for this lack of regeneration has been identified on the model of the rodent and neutralized by specific antibodies. In a study conducted on nonhuman primates whose spinal cord was partially damaged, the neutralization of this factor showed an improvement of motor function after injury compared with untreated animals. Then d? a study conducted on lesions of the sensorimotor cortex of rodents, this treatment demonstrated a significant increase in the functional reorganization of the engine system. Another therapeutic approach that we will test is to implement on the outskirts of the cortical region injured neuronal-type cells from the brains of the same subject that were grown and multiplied previously. L? exact effect on cortical function of such treatment requires to pass on the model of the non-human primate before make l? object d? a possible study on patients. We will d? first determine to what extent the function of the motor cortex is affected by injury, if the secondary motor regions play a role in recovery mechanisms and then if the observed changes are influenced by l? application of the treatments mentioned. This function can be quantified through the excitable properties of neurons in the motor cortex: stimulation by microelectrodes produces a muscle in the fingers, measurable activity by chronic electromyographic recordings. You can then artificially inactivate this portion of cortex and measure the impact on l? muscle activity. Finally, comparing the results obtained in treated and untreated animals. D? other methods are included in this project, namely different dexterity and l? analysis of anatomical changes in the cerebral cortex through l? magnetic resonance imaging. The results obtained can have an impact on possible clinical application in a broader study, either directly using the same basis of cortical lesion treatment, or targeting rehabilitation on secondary motor cortical regions.
