Lead Lay summary The aim of this project is to observe the structural dynamics that accompany superconductivity by means of ultrafast electron diffraction. This information is important in understanding the mechanism responsible for high temperature superconductivity in cuprates. These materials are promising for application in high capacity cables, magnets for MRI, high precision magnetic sensors and even electronic circuits. However, the inability to engineer higher transition temperatures, limits severely their effective applications. The understanding of their physics is the first step towards a better control of their properties. Ultrafast light pulses can deplete the Cooper-pairs condensate in a cold superconductor, driving the system in its normal metallic state. During the depletion and subsequent re-formation of the condensate, atomic motions can be followed with femtosecond resolution in time and atomic resolution in space by diffracting ultrashort electron pulses. By investigating different chemical compositions, the relation between the structural dynamics and superconductivity will be studied. In particular, these experiments give information about the electron-phonon coupling parameter, its symmetry and temperature dependence. Currently, ultrafast electron diffraction is capable of a time-resolution of few hundreds femtoseconds. During our project we will develop the Radiofrequency streak camera technology, that will allow us to break this limit and push time-resolution below 100 fs. The concept behind this technology is the following: a long pulse of electrons is overlapped on the sample with an excitation light pulse. The electron scattering from the sample before the arrival of the laser pulse see an unperturbed specimen, while those scattering after the laser pulse arrival see the excited state. The sample evolution in time, therefore, is contained in the electron pulse, up to its duration. When such pulse enters the streak camera, the particles arriving first are deflected upwards, while those arriving later are deflected downwards. As a result, the temporal evolution of the sample is projected on a spatial coordinate that can be imaged on a CCD camera. Time resolution is not given anymore by the ability to generate short electron pulses, but rather by the ability of the streaking device to separate in space particles that are very close in time. Thanks to this technological advance, the ultrafast phenomena associated with the electron phonon coupling in superconductors will be studied with unprecedented detail.
