Lead lay summary empirical observations nourish the supposition that Swiss economic law is often not adequately carried out: criminal and administrative authorities often don't have the necessary resources or expertise, to punish violations of law standards consistently; reversed private entities often hesitate to assert claims for damages in the civil courts and to engage in rational apathy, because they want to take the risk of costs associated with a complaint not or assess the effort with views of the purchase of proof of and evidence as too big. In addition, procedural mechanisms which allow a variety of victim, similar claims in a single procedure in efficient manner, to make missing in Swiss law. Overall conditions in the course of now several years of financial and economic crisis have more difficult again himself. In particular repeatedly structural implementation deficits occurred in the legal management of various claims and scandals in the financial market law, which can be traced directly to poorly designed legal basis for supervision and law enforcement. In the Centre of the development of the present ambizione project in-depth considerations of the role of private in the enforcement of economic law will be, especially as the possibilities and limits of?Private enforcement? in the Swiss legal system are still little understood. This involves on the one hand, to balance the tension between rule of law and the postulates of effectiveness and efficiency; on the other hand models from other jurisdictions will be used the way of comparative of law, to solutions de ferenda for those areas put to formulate, where the Swiss law terms?Private enforcement? is still developing and potential for improvement. In its core go so far gained, that the Switzerland in the areas of business law, traditionally very strong on the so-called public enforcement, i.e., the law enforcement by public authorities, is based off. The sog.?Private enforcement?, i.e. law enforcement or on the initiative of private, is, however, so far only very weakly developed in the Swiss legal system. As a result, that (pecuniary) damage resulting from the breach of legal/economic standards, de lege lata, often under-compensated remain, which is suboptimal for individual protection reasons. Implementation deficits are even more disturbing from perspective of society as a whole, especially since many business law decrees aimed at achieving actualize interests; consider the? effective competition? in antitrust law, the? fair competition? in fair trading law and? functioning financial markets? and?Transparency and equal treatment for investors and investors? in financial market law. The empirical research shows that these protection goals for the benefit of the general public in everyday law carried out inadequately, which Switzerland ultimately the effectiveness of the legal system of financial and economic space principle in question is. Against this background, the present research project deals with the various mechanisms for the enforcement of legal/economic standards, with the aim of exposing inconsistencies and shortcomings in the present system of legal protection of Switzerland. The term?Legal protection? in the present context in a comprehensive, yes objective sense is understood; in the focus of interest is therefore not only the individual protection of the participating economic actors, but rather the protection of the law in and of itself, so the realization of objective law and the underlying legislative objectives. Because it often involves multi-dimensional protection objectives in economic law, i.e. individual and collective interests were partly parallel to each other to carry out, the requirements for an effective law enforcement are particularly high. A sophisticated system of legal protection, which provides a meaningful distribution of competence between the State on the one hand and affected private on the other hand when the sanctioning of breaches of the law is needed.
