Lead Lay summary The genetic architecture of complex phenotypic traits (e.g. morphological) is thought to deeply influence their evolution. This project seeks to characterize and understand the evolutionary implications of the pleiotropic nature of the genes involved in adaptations to environmental variation as found in natural populations. Evolutionary quantitative genetics treats the genetic architecture of phenotypic traits in an abstract way that ignores the genetic details of such traits. In the context of multivariate evolution, the tool that bridges the gap between the genotypes and the phenotypes of correlated traits is the G-matrix, the matrix of genetic variance-covariances that encapsulates the structure of heritable genetic variation of a population and helps predict its short term evolution. However, adaptive phenotypic changes are primarily caused by selective changes in allele frequencies at the genes underlying the evolving traits. These allelic changes not only depend on the genetic variation for the traits but also on the existence of genetic constraints, as caused by the pleiotropic interactions of the genes. Those changes will also affect the evolution of the G-matrix itself by causing changes in genetic variation in the population. Therefore, in oder to understand the evolutionary properties of a population, we have to understand how the genetic architecture of a set of traits interacts with the different evolutionary forces that prevail in natural populations. This project proposes to open the black box and look at the role the precise genetic architecture of the traits plays in predicting their evolution. Properties of the G-matrix will be studied in the context of spatially subdivided populations because allele frequency changes also strongly depend on drift and gene flow. Pleiotropy and modularity will be the two main features of the genotype-phenotype map that will be studied. Ample empirical evidence points to the widespread variation of the pleiotropic and epistatic nature of the genes involved in the makeup of phenotypic traits whereas theory is mostly concerned with simple, uniformly additive genetic architectures. In order to have a more comprehensive picture of the process of evolution by natural selection, we have to incorporate these genetic details into our theoretical description of the process. This project will seek to, first, unravel the evolutionary significance of variation in pleiotropy of the genotype-phenotype (i.e. its modularity) map using available genomic data and, second, understand the evolution of pleiotropy itself using a modeling approach.
