Lead lay summary the project intends an in-depth monographic confrontation with the Constance canons and chronicler Heinrich Truchsess von Diessenhofen (c. 1300-1376). He is considered as the author of a Geschichtswerkes over the years 1316-1361, where Pope, Imperial and Constance bishopric history are closely intertwined, one of the most prestigious Süddeutsche historiographer of the 14th century. The peculiarity lies in the present reference of his work: In fact he reported exclusively through the events of his own time, making him an important witness for the not poor at dramatic events of the 14th century. This he relied in part on his own observations, to another on reports by informants, under which some fellow students of Diessenhofen may be suspected, who had studied law together with the later chroniclers in Bologna. A special focus of the study, which will investigate a closely paraphrased personal network that applies these informants. In a first step the biography of Diessenhofen to work on new. Of particular importance to his family and religious background. In fact influenced both the descent from a Ministerialis family of Habsburg as also quite critical Pope loyal of Diessenhofen his historiography, which sustained has been shaped by the conflict between Emperor and papacy. A second focus lies in the reconstruction of the Diessenhofschen Office, especially with regard to the relationship of the two surviving editors of Geschichtswerkes. In this step also the internal organisation of the Chronicle should be exposed and the question, indeed, how close was the rapporteur in the described events. Most recently, Diessenhofen place within the southern Empire historiography of the 14th century is to be determined. Constance Canon belonged to a group of chroniclers with comparable social backgrounds and common themes, which have experienced a different personal evaluation but in any case. Outlined work, the requirements should be explored on a concrete example under which historiography is created, what it contributes to the historical research.
