Lead organic photovoltaiche cells are gaining particular interest not only for their content production cost, but also for the ability to be manufactured in different forms and for their ease of integration in different objects. Thanks to these features, the built-in solar cell industry in buildings (building integrated photovoltaics) is gaining increasing attention. Lay summary Windows are photovoltaic energy solution advantageous in urban densely populated centres where the presence of numerous photovoltaic panels would be problematic. The photovoltaic material suitable for this purpose should be transparent and non-coloured. These features may be obtained by adjusting the optical properties of photovoltaic materials that absorb only the portion of the solar spectrum that our eyes are not sensitive (UV and IR). However, this inevitably reduces the efficiency of photovoltaic devices. To work around this problem, the goal of the project is to prepare a clever photovoltaic material can change their electronic and optical characteristics in response to external stimulus of sunlight. The material in question must be able to become transparent and no color in the absence of strong solar illumination (acting like a traditional window glass), and to become colorful and photovoltaics if exposed to an intense source of sunlight. In addition, the darkening of the window would ensure a reduction of the internal temperature of the House with energy-saving cooling installations. The objectives of the project will be: the synthesis of conjugated organic polymers (key component in photovoltaic materials) that can change their shape according to light stimuli, the study of the optical and electronic properties of these molecules. and finally the preparation of photovoltaic devices. The results of this work will certainly make an important contribution not only in the photovoltaic sector but also in the chemistry, physics and material sciences. The knowledge gained during the course of the project may also be extended to other applications in the field of optics and electronics, such as the design of OLED, organic transistors and lasers.
