Lead lay summary the aim of the project is the comprehensive agreement boarding action by Euripides' ion Philology, socio-historical, and dialog-pragmatic point of view. The ion occupies a central position on the transition to the late works of Euripides. The forest is one of the the highest developed of the poet, irony and self-referentiality are pronounced, and work with leitmotifs, the poet has achieved little else a similar compression. In addition to these literary phenomena is another special feature of the piece in the importance of extra dramatic reality of ancient Athens: since this tragedy deals with Athenian characters and myths motifs, based the action particularly on social structures of Athenian society and elements of the Athenian ideology. Structures of the social reality of Athenian privacy (E.g. role of women and abandoned children) and politically relevant Ideologeme of Polisgemeinschaft (autochthony and Ionian root relationship) were evoked in the original audience. The tragedy deals so very frankly with the Athenian life world and crosses the border between the world of the game and the external reality in the political but also in the private sector. The project sets itself the task to work out the strong interaction of literary and socio historical aspects. A second focus is on the analysis of communication structures. This will be investigated what insights can be gained from the way in which the characters interact: in addition to the content of the dialogues of the poet has also its form designed against each other allow to draw conclusions on the individual characterization, the captured speaking postures and the setting of the figures. Using pragmatic dialogue and surrounding approaches (E.g. courtesy research, gender communication), a greater depth of interpretation will be achieved here. The analysis of individual passages will help to perceive the dynamics of the characters and their relationship closer and sharper to record this dramatic conflicts and understanding barriers.
