Lead Lay summary Lay Summary ?Why Nature Chose Phosphates? is the title of a Science classic article published in 1987 by Westheimer ( Science 1987 , 235 , 1173). The initial statement ?phosphate esters and anhydrides dominate the living world but are seldom used as intermediates by organic chemists? is still valid today, though -relating to the latter part- there have been tremendous advances in phosphate, phosphonate, phosphoramidate, phosphorimidate and phosphinate chemistry over the last decades. The synthetic chemist can now choose from a plethora of useful chemical transformations involving these modifications. The fact that phosphate modifications of proteins, metabolites and cofactors are omnipresent in nature directly leads to the conclusion that phosphates and phosphoanhydrides provide unique binding scaffolds for molecular recognition. This is also obvious from the many distinct binding pockets for e.g. adenosine-triphosphate, inositol-polyphosphates, pyridoxal-phosphate and thiamine-pyrophosphate. Recently, the secondary messengers inositol-polyphosphates (IPx) moved into sharp focus of research as their importance in different cellular signaling processes became obvious. Structurally, IPx are derived from the carbocyclic polyol inositol, that is phosphorylated or pyrophosphorylated in distinct patterns provoking different biological responses. To study these functions in detail, there is great need for concise syntheses, as extractions from biological sources are tedious for some and impossible for more complex IPx. Inositol polyphosphates are extremely challenging targets to study for different reasons: The high density of negative charges in the final products: the high hydrophilicity of these compounds underscores the need to apply phosphate-protecting groups, which can be quantitatively and cleanly cleaved in the last step, as chromatographic purification of the final product should be avoided. IPx are derived from the meso-compound myo-inositol, therefore the development of stereoselective syntheses, either by the use of chiral auxiliaries or by enantioselective catalytic processes is mandatory. The use of IPx in cell assays is limited by at least two factors: their inability to penetrate cell membranes and the necessity to release large amounts of IPx with temporal and spatial control if cell-signaling studies are envisaged. For these reasons, I propose to develop C2 -symmetric bidentate phosphorylating reagents that can be used to desymmetrize meso -polyols. These reagents will not only be used for the desymmetrization step like a normal chiral auxiliary as e.g. camphor, but at the same time function as a phosphate protecting group, thereby streamlining the planned total syntheses. Furthermore, the C2 -symmetric scaffold harbors the possibility to develop functional protecting groups. Their function relates to the third point: studying highly charged metabolites necessitates the development of lipophilic prodrugs that release the active metabolite after passive diffusion intracellularly upon enzymatic activation (biolabile prodrugs) or activation by irradiation (caged compounds). The latter allow the researcher to control both temporal and spatial release. Thus, the optimal phosphate protecting group in this field of research would be: bidentate and C2 -symmetric to avoid problems arising from chirality at phosphorous, inexpensive and quickly accessible, able to desymmetrize meso -polyols and orthogonal to other protecting groups, cleaved quantitatively and cleanly by chemical reagents and also by enzymes or irradiation. The development and application of reagent controlled asymmetric phosphorylation in the enantioselective total syntheses of different inositol phosphates as well as initial studies in biological settings is the aim of this project. If successful, these syntheses will pave the way for the design of innovative chemical tools to study the complex inositol phosphate metabolism and its function in detail. This will have impact on our understanding of distinct cellular signaling processes and diseases associated with malfunctions in cellular signaling.
