Lead this project aims to study? on a long duration? through artistic, archaeological and literary documents the way in which the main Milanese relics were perceived by the different ethnic groups coexisting in Lombardy during the high middle ages (from the 4th to the 10th century). Lay summary through l? initiative St Ambrose (339/40-397), Bishop of Milan, the relics are in Lombardy a fundamental identity function. In the following centuries, while Lombardy became Earth d? home and d? invasion, the bodies of the local saints will therefore be transformed in barometer d? exclusion and d? inclusion within d? a changing society. Furthermore Milan says always its authority and its development towards l? outdoor through his relics. This interdisciplinary work therefore wish to reflect on the signs describing? After each wave d? invasion? the progressive constitution d? cultural identities and ethnic news. In a first time l will be studied? emergence of the cult of relics, put in place by Ambrose constituting a network of religious monuments in the service of the? city identity. The reflection will also focus on the fortunes of the cult of Gervais and Protais which s? adds, after his death, that of Ambrose himself. Will be taken into account in particular the manner in which reception and the devotion of the Milanese saints vary according to the various ethnic groups. In a second moment, the citadines relics, especially those d?Ambrose, will be analyzed within the discourse of propaganda of the Franks that s? ownership at the end of the VIII century, l? the city's ancient heritage. Will be finally considered l? thorny issue of constant presence and very badly documented the Byzantines on the lombard ground to determine their place as cultural mediators in various stages of the cultural construction of the Lombardy. In parallel will be analyzed the role held by the Milanese relics in the dissemination of the prestige and the ideas of the city in Europe. Be it artistic, architectural or liturgical, level it s? will be to understand the relationship between transmission of ideas and the Milanese models and the gift of his relics.
