Lead the AEgIS at CERN experiment aims to measure for the first time the effect of gravity on antimatter by measuring the free fall of a beam of atoms of antihydrogen. This research project will develop a base of nuclear emulsion detector to measure l? antihydrogen in free fall, essentially photographing its free fall. The scientific objective of this project is to use this detector to perform in 2015 the first measure of the effect of gravity on antimatter. Lay summary the effect of gravity on the antimatter was never measured by experience. The theory of Einstein's general relativity is a classical theory which is not compatible with quantum mechanics. One of the great challenges of theoretical physics is to modify general relativity (or quantum mechanics) for qu? they become compatible. Therefore, an experiment which measures the effect of gravity on the antimatter is of great theoretical interest. In addition, the low d equivalence principle?Einstein - that is the c? ur of general relativity - requires that any object, either matter or antimatter should fall towards the Earth at the same speed. To use the analogy of an Apple: an anti-pomme should fall towards the Earth at the same time qu? an Apple. Any deviation from this principle would be a clear violation of the theory of relativity and provide valuable information for the theoretical development of a quantum theory of gravity. The objective of this research project is to perform, with collaboration AEgIS, the first measurement ever made of the effect of gravity on antimatter by measuring the fall free of an antihydrogen beam. A key component of the AEgIS unit is the need to measure the free fall of the? antihydrogen. This project will develop a detector of free-fall nuclear emulsions - high granularity and very sensitive films based - in order to measure the free fall of the? antihydrogen. The project is based at the Centre Albert Einstein for the fundamental physics of the University of Bern that which collaborators are world leaders in nuclear emulsion-based technologies. The scientific goal is to use this detector to make the first measurement of the free fall of the antimatter in 2015.
