Lead Lay summary Why sex and recombination have evolved is one of the big outstanding questions in evolutionary biology. The aim of this project is to elucidate the evolution of transformation, a special form of sex that is found in bacteria. Sex and recombination are almost ubiquitous in animals in plants. However, the factors that have favored the evolution of these processes are still not fully understood, in particular because there are well known and substantial fitness costs associated with sex and recombination. Although bacteria do not undergo meiosis, three different processes can also lead to homologous recombination: conjugation (the transmission of plasmid DNA from one bacterium to another), transduction (exchange of DNA through phages), and transformation (the taking up and integration of free DNA from the environment). The goal of this project is to understand why, evolutionarily speaking, many bacterial species engage in transformation. The project has a theoretical and an experimental part. In the theoretical part, we will develop a number of mathematical models studying under what conditions transformation can be favored by natural selection. We will investigate different evolutionary and ecological scenarios that have been shown to be of relevance for the evolution of sex in eukaryotic organisms, including the accumulation of deleterious mutations through random genetic drift and host-parasite coevolution (e.g., coevolution of bacteria with phage parasites). In the experimental part, we will conduct evolution experiments in which bacteria are grown under conditions that are expected to select for increased rates of transformation. These experiments will elucidate how evolvable transformation rates are and whether increasing the transformation rate entails any fitness costs for the bacteria. The results of these investigations will contribute to a better understanding of recombination in general and genetic exchange in bacteria in particular. It is well known that bacteria can exchange genes horizontally across species borders, so understanding the short-term advantages of transformation will also help understand these long-term evolutionary processes. An important applied aspect of our research is to better understand the role of genetic exchange in bacteria in the context of the evolution of antibiotic resistance, a major problem in public health.
