Lead Lay summary how the new management reforms public (NPM), which seek to integrate principles of private management in the public sector, modify the territory of Commons management practices? Based on this general issue, this research aims to highlight the impacts of these new models of managerial management sustainability social, economic and environmental land uses, focusing on the example practice of Swiss municipalities. Paradoxically, although the principles of NPM calling for a leaner State, public action appears more necessary than ever to control urban sprawl and urbanization of the countryside. Communes, which are in charge of the development of the territory, have various tools to manage their spatial development. In addition to traditional tools related to the spatial planning (plans of areas, building regulations), many municipalities also use tools of private law (public property, rights of use arising from quotas, easements, surface rights, contracts with private owners, etc.) or public (taxation) to influence their development. This project aims, first, to demonstrate that the principles of NPM have altered the balance between the various tools used to control the spatial development and, secondly, that these changes have a tangible impact on the sustainability of land uses, impact that will be described more precisely. Two steps were planned to highlight strategies for spatial development of Commons. So in that, in the first, it is get a general view of the communal practices in Switzerland, the second conducts detailed case study. Two case studies will be also carried out in the United States, in order to provide points of comparison with a country known to commonly use private law instruments to control its territorial development. This project has a double objective. Firstly it seeks to give an overview of the strategies of land use in Switzerland by focusing on the various tools mobilised by the communes. Secondly, it seeks to give meaning to these changes by registering their analysis in the current debates on the evolution of practices in the public sector to the advent of the NPM. This project aims to take the opposite of generally shared position that the NPM has a clear organizational impact but it does not change the concrete outputs of public intervention.
