Lead Lay summary the present project proposes to continue the work undertaken on the biographies of l?Former Empire (approx. 2500-2150 BC) by extending the issue in later periods, first intermediate period, Middle Kingdom and second intermediate period (approx. 2150-1550 BC). L? ambition is to produce a history of the Egyptian autobiographical genre during the first millennium of its development (approx. 2500-1500 BC J.-C.), according to its own dynamics and in relation to l? cultural, political and social history.) L? autobiography is l? a characteristic genres, and, under its particular shape, culturally specific l?Ancient Egypt. Textual production par excellence of l? elite, its place lies in the non-Royal burial sphere, in the monumental domain (support lapidary). The historical permanence of his certificate, l?Former Empire until? at the end of the first millennium BC, in fact? with the funerary literature (texts of the pyramids, coffin texts, etc.)? the textual genre long continuously attested in Egypt. During its history, the kind is subject to major changes, at the level of the form, content and its functions. L? proposed study is thus both that d? a major textual genre as a genre, and the modes of l? expression of cultural values that are associated with it, within d? a textual sphere? not Royal, funeral, lapidary? Special. For l? proposed time of work, ad hoc, focused on some specific aspects of gender, or brushed a very general picture of l? evolution of it. L? proposed study will multiply points of view, and by linking them, will produce a diachronic perspective detailed l? evolution of the genus in its determinations. To this end, shall be based on the results already obtained during the previous research on the texts of l?Former Empire, as well as the analytical tools developed in l? occasion thereof. Consider in particular the following dimensions in their interaction, their evolution, as well as in their relation to the broader cultural developments: physical context and materiality of the inscriptions. rhetoric and textual authority; form, compositional, stylistic and linguistic; themes and motifs, expression of the singularity and l? singular event; actants, functions? authority, points of reference and legitimation; relations with d? other contemporary genres, reports? shipping and literature; involved public, nature and target of l functions? Act of written communication. Through the particular Prism formed by the autobiographical genre, l? s proposed study? understood more generally as a contribution to l? Egyptian cultural history. It will thus address notions of d? innovation and tradition, in a culture that strongly enhancing the latter expresses the change in l? enshrining within the tradition, reworking and constantly transforming it from l? inside. We will study l? evolution of the system of cultural values and their expression, depending on the variable l? footprint Royal as normative body built and based, or not, this system of values. Will be the variable terms of l? textual self-manifestation of l? individual as an individual, as well as the? expression of l? event in its singularity, in a culture that tends to favour l? d expression? strongly paradigmatic events. Because of l? seniority of the genre, l? study of it is also that of l? evolution of ancient textuality: emergence of the continuous text, then gradual development d? a non-Royal textual sphere. With the end of royal control over the production and distribution of the texts after l?Former Empire, the first intermediate period is a 'textual laboratory', characterized by multiple explorations. Inheriting from them, some major autobiographies of the Middle Kingdom have cases of close communication with the literature within the clean, narrative and sapiential, meaning that emerges at this time. By l? study of the dynamics of historical text through different genres networks, will be sought to clarify the conditions for the development of literature written in its earliest phases, and to better understand how it articulates a more problematic fashion, cultural values and the formal conventions inherited from the textual laboratory formed by the autobiographical genre.
