Lead Lay summary Ultracold atoms in an optical lattice can realize many prototypical models in condensed matter physics. Many of those models, like the Hubbard model, cannot be solved by numerical means. A fresh approach is to try to use the optical lattice system as a quantum simulator for such models, which could tell us to what degree the real material is described by the model. Previously, we worked hard on the validation phase of this quantum simulator, and we could show that the simulator produces the correct answers not only for the Bose-Hubbard model, but also for the Fermi-Hubbard model at the presently relevant temperatures. However, it also became clear that effects such as spontaneous emission, atom losses, laser noise, collisions with background atoms, equilibration and (re)thermalization times become important in present state-of-the-art experiments, and the next generation of experiments will have to improve on these issues. In this proposal, we suggest to continue our quantitative analysis of cold gases. We will closely follow the experimental developments in the systems that we have studied before, but we will also extend our analysis to a variety of other contexts: 1. Bose-Hubbard model, where single site resolution offers new possibilities for criticality and thermometry. 2. Fermi-Hubbard model, where the thermodynamics for temperatures approaching the Neel temperature will be determined 3. Impurities in cold gases (polaron models). We would like to study polaron physics in a variety of contexts, such as an impurity in a Bose-Einstein condensate or impurities in the presence of a multi-component fermionic system. Both static and itinerant impurities, and both continuous and lattice models are of interest. 4. Mixtures and imbalanced systems. We will study when and how they can be understood as a system of interating polarons. 5. Disordered fermions. Experiments on Anderson localization in one dimension were done with cold gases recently, but in three dimensions questions remain. 6. Supersolids. The study of long-range interactions remains difficult in numerical studies, but experimental progress with molecules and Rydberg atoms opens new perspectives for experiments. We also would like to initiate the next step in this program, which is working toward a better understanding of materials, through exploring two recent alogrithmic developments: 1. diagrammatic Monte Carlo applied to the electron gas problem and simple metals 2. tensor network states in combination with stochastic methods in order to study frustrated spin models.
