Lead Lay summary during the cold war, the world was divided into two antagonistic blocs who indulged a battle without mercy on behalf of civilizational designs considered irreconcilable. Fight for the conquest of the spirits in particular and for the increase in respective zones of influence. The confrontation was carried out not only by the usual means, but also through new means: psychological, non-Orthodox, even subversive. Golden age of clandestine actions, this total war mobilized forces well beyond governmental and institutional circles, making emerge anti-Communist guards (Mark Mazower) composite and ambiguous, between the public and private sectors. More importantly, these anti-Communist guards deployed, partly under the auspices of the United States, transnational activities, like peace and freedom, the Congress for the freedom of culture, of Aginter Press, etc. How Switzerland beyond its efforts in domestic politics to make room at the Communist danger, participated in this transnational crusade? The official Switzerland and certain circles joined in for? common works? Solidarity there they appeared? How to characterize these relationships? It is to answer these questions that research intends to address, in a perspective at once political, social, cultural and economic, on the relationship that existed between the anti-Communist Swiss Guard and its foreign counterparts. It will be to explore the one hand foreign connections anti-Communist Swiss Guard, and on the other hand Swiss connections of the anti-Communist foreign guards. This two-way interaction study aims to highlight instead of Switzerland on the European plan and the frame of still largely unknown acts - which are the protagonists, Swiss side, Federal Police, military intelligence, Swiss of civic action, Schweizerischer Aufklarungsdienst, Schweizerisches Ost-Institute Committee, etc. –, while highlighting the acts, such as community foundationsnetworks, the constellations in play. Research share the assumption that one of the major historiographical challenges for this period is to review the history of the cold war by the history of networks that brought it (Bernard Ludwig) and better understand the social density of anti-Communists (Jean-Jacques Becker and Serge Berstein).
