Lead Despite the rapidly increasing production of micro and nanoparticles to be used as building blocks for material fabrication, society has not yet seen their extended application to consumer products. The main reason for this delay is the fact that to date many unknowns are still present when it comes to understanding the way micro and nanoparticles behave and interact. Lay summary The fabrication of complex materials using the spontaneous organization (self-assembly) of nanoscale building blocks has recently attracted enormous fundamental and applied interest. By specifically designing nanoparticles (NPs) and by controlling their interactions, one can direct their assembly.  In particular, the use of anisotropic NPs lends itself to the fabrication of materials with anisotropic mechanical, optical or electrical properties. Among these systems, thin films and 2D materials find widespread use, e.g. in microelectronics, as anti-reflective coatings, in sensing and in solar-cell technology. Liquid-liquid interfaces constitute a highly suitable template for the assembly of 2D NP-based materials. NPs strongly adsorb at interfaces, where they can move and interact also via additional interactions compared to those in bulk solutions, such as long-range electrostatic dipolar and capillary interactions. Regarding the latter, it has been demonstrated for anisotropic micrometer-sized particles (MPs) that capillary interactions, stemming from the non-uniform curvature of contact lines at the interface, can lead to the formation of directional assemblies, such as end-to-end dimers or chains. The corresponding observations for nanoscale objects are to date practically absent, due to the lack of a suitable in situ characterization technique. There therefore exists a gap between MP- and NP-self-assembly at liquid interfaces (SALI). In the former case, information on the single-particle and collective behaviour is available, but the use of micron-sized objects has limited practical interest. Conversely, NP-SALI has enormous potential for applications, due to the extraordinary physical and chemical properties of the nanoscale building blocks, but the degree of control over the assembly process is significantly lower and the properties of individual particles at liquid interfaces remain to be fully understood. This project aims at bridging this gap. I have recently developed a technique based on freeze-fracturing, shadow-casting (FreSCa) cryogenic scanning electron microscopy (cryo-SEM) which makes it possible for the first time to investigate the wetting properties of NPs as small as 10 nm in situ at liquid-liquid interfaces. The proposed project will initially make use of this approach, complemented by colloidal-probe atomic force microscopy, to perform an exhaustive experimental characterization of basic aspects of capillary interactions, such as surface topology, size and aspect-ratio effects, to date not yet fully understood, even for micron-sized objects. These basic studies will be performed on individual anisotropic model MPs and NPs, for which the size, shape and surface chemistry can be finely controlled and linked to the structure of SALI. Deformations of the interface stemming from capillary interactions will be directly visualized and the resulting interfacial structure will be compared to theoretical models. After these fundamental tasks are completed, this knowledge will be used to guide the capillary SALI of directional structures (end-to-end dimers and particle chains) of systems of high practical interest: namely metal (Au) and diluted magnetic semiconductor (doped ZnO) nanorods. After SALI, the directional assemblies will be transferred to a solid substrate for use and integration. In order to obtain a 2D material with macroscopic anisotropic properties, templates will be employed to align and localize the assembled structures during transfer. Finally, to achieve a higher control on directionality, interactions and structure of the interfacial assemblies, magnetically responsive nanoscale ellipsoids will be used together with external magnetic fields during assembly and transfer. Applications are foreseen in many areas, but I will focus on developing the embedding of 2D arrays of anisotropic particles in thin polymer films of controlled properties. Permeable polymeric membranes containing Au nanorod dimers can be used as high-sensitivity plasmonic sensors in liquid. Thin films, incorporating semiconducting nanowire arrays, may find applications in flexible electronics or solar cells. Embedding ordered arrays of magnetically responsive anisotropic particles that can be aligned by external fields in compliant polymer films may be used to fabricate optical switches or ultra-thin displays.
