Lead Lay summary With the exception of hydrogen and helium, all the other elements in nature that are fundamental for life, like carbon and oxygen, or that we see every day, like iron or silver, are produced in stars. One of the greatest tasks for human knowledge today is to understand how such elements form in stars. A lot of information required to address this question is obtained from stellar spectroscopic observations, where element abundances can be measured in different type of stars in our Galaxy or much further away, at distances billions of kilometers further away from the Earth. Another crucial source of information on how the elements form in stars is hidden in primitive meteorites. Few parts per million of the meteorite material is made of small particles of dust of presolar origin, that were produced in ancient stars that finished their life before the formation of our solar system. In order to correctly understand all these observations, we need to create computational models of stars to reproduce their evolution, and to correctly simulate all the nuclear processes responsible for the element production. The fundamental goal of this project is to create a comprehensive set of abundances for light and heavy elements produced in stars, enabling us to test stellar model predictions with stellar observations and presolar grains measurements. In particular, we will focus our study in the analysis of the nucleosynthesis signature in presolar carbide grains condensed in different type of stars, and in the origin of anomalous old carbon-rich stars, called CEMP stars. In this cross disciplinary context, involving different disciplines from astrophysics to astronomy, nuclear physics and chemistry, we adopt the post-processing method to calculate the stellar yields. Therefore, the stellar structure is calculated previously with a reduced number of isotopes crucial for the energy generation inside the star, and the detailed full nucleosynthesis is calculated separately by a post-processing code (the code is called PPN), guided by the stellar evolution data. New numerical techniques for massively parallel post-processing are included (e.g., MPI libraries), to enable large-scale high-resolution simulations of nucleosynthesis on full stellar structure and explosion data sets, taking advantage of multi-core computing high performance clusters available today.
