Lead Lay summary Airborne black carbon (BC) nanoparticles influence the atmospheric radiation balance and have adverse health effects. This research project aims at characterising particulate black carbon in the past and present atmosphere by analysis of ice core records and with in-situ measurements. BC containing particles originate mostly from anthropogenic combustion sources. They impact on the Earth's climate directly through scattering and absorption of light and indirectly through modification of clouds. The magnitude of these effects and the life-cycle of BC particles depend strongly on their physical properties and their potential to act as cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) or ice nuclei (IN). Knowledge about atmospheric BC from pre-industrial times to the present is required to investigate and assess the human impact on climate change by now and in the future. BC has a mean atmospheric residence time of several days only, thus its global distribution is inhomogeneous and strongly correlated to sources. Consequently BC properties are needed from many locations and environments. Historical records of BC are scarce to this day, and the properties of BC containing particles in the present atmosphere are only partially characterised. The single-particle soot photometer (SP2) combines laser-induced incandescence with optical sizing to quantify the BC mass in individual nanoparticles and it provides added information on coatings with scattering material. The SP2 will be used to characterise BC containing nanoparticles with in-situ measurements in urban and remote environments and in historic ice cores from different locations. Further experiments aim at clarifying the role of BC in cloud formation processes. Knowing the natural level of atmospheric BC in preindustrial times is required to quantify the anthropogenic contribution at present. The novel measurement technique further promises to provide deeper insight into the timescale of atmospheric transformation processes of BC particles such as mixing with other material. The latter strongly influences their light scattering and absorption efficiency as well as their potential to act as CCN or IN. A better understanding of these properties and processes is required to improve the description of BC in climate models towards a reduction of associated prediction uncertainties.
