Lead lay summary the research project examined practice, norms and legitimacy of the plundering of goods in the war cultural-scientific and economic-historical perspective. The figures make 1204 on the one hand with the sack of Constantinople, on the other hand the destruction of Tenochtitlans of 1521. background: looting in the war is a timeless phenomenon. The looting again increasingly plays an important role in the latest wars. Latest studies have referred to such forms as returning pre-modern economies of violence. In contrast to the looting in the pre-modern as well as finance the war served mainly of symbolic communication. Who plundered could manifest symbolic triumph over the enemy. Character prey items were at the same time social prestige and economic values. This results in a field of tension between economy and symbolism. Target: Target is the writing of a thesis. The project examines value formation of booty and the legitimisation of plundering operations. Standards, practice and legitimacy are the priority fields of research. Following rarely answered questions arise: from for whatever reason was ever sacked? How was dealt with the objects? How was to restrict the looting trying? Which values played a key role here? The justifying arguments led perpetrators? Meaning: The potential for innovation is to a wide range of perspectives on a little-examined phenomenon of pre-modern war, practice, analyze standards and notions of interdisciplinary waiting out and to answer fundamental questions in the field of economic and cultural history. The three fields of practice, standards and justifications are examined in their respective interdependencies and the socio cultural context. Also, the innovation of the project is that it takes a consistently comparative approach at the interface of different disciplines. It serves numerous internationally proven research areas such as the debate over the object importance, cultural heritage, restitution of art objects, cultural, legal, war and economic history. Also, the project provides important insights in pre-modern forms of violence, normative and economic operations of the Kriegswesens and dealing with thing cultures. New results are religious as profane standards and values, to the exercise of domination and violence control expected. The project collaborates with the universities of Münster, Constance, St. Andrews, Paris and central research facilities at home and abroad.
