Lead lay summary the replacement of fossil fuels with ethanol fuel, made from renewable lignocellulosic materials such as straw or wood, for example, is an important measure to reduce climate-damaging CO2 emissions. The project pursues a new strategy which allows to produce ethanol in a simpler and thus economically attractive process. Background: The current global warming is due to anthropogenic greenhouse gases such as CO2 emissions, of which a large part of transport is created. An important measure to curb these emissions is the increased use of renewable fuels, such as ethanol already used, which is based but so far mostly on sugar cane or corn starch as a raw material and thus food and feed konkurrenziert. Alternatively, but technically more difficult, ethanol can be produced from lignocellulosic materials, such as straw, green waste waste, or wood. In the current process the thermo chemical biomass will be in a first step, treated to allow the subsequent enzymatic cleavage of cellulose into simple sugars, which finally fermented with the aid of micro-organisms for ethanol. To advance the commercialization of lignocellulosic ethanol, this process must be greatly simplified and less expensive. Target: A simplified, integrated process, which allows the direct production of ethanol from lignozellulosehaltiger biomass, should be developed and examined in the project. The proposed procedure summarizes the production of necessary cellulose decomposing enzymes, the saccharification of biomass and the fermentation of the sugar and, where appropriate, the prior separation of ethanol in a single continuous bioreactor. Meaning: The reduction of CO2 emissions by means of partial replacement of fossil with renewable fuels is a global formulated goal, which is to be achieved with political directives in the EU and in the United States. These measures generate an enormous market potential and require considerable efforts and investments can be implemented. Research programmes, which the development of alternative, low-carbon energy sources with the potential to the short to medium-term commercialization to the target have, are therefore essential.
