Lead Lay summary The strong need to develop sustainable energy technologies that decrease dependence on non-renewable energy resources has led to a number of approaches based on windmills, biomass, fuel cells, and solar cells. Among these renewable energy resources, photovoltaics (solar cells) offer great potential for materialization. In particular, organic photovoltaic devices hold great promise for commercialization due to their facile processing and low-cost. The challenge, however, is to develop materials that can efficiently convert the solar radiation to electrical energy. To date, most of the research is focused on developing new electron-donating materials (polythiophenes and other conjugated polymers). We, however, propose design, synthesis, and properties study of novel corannulene based material with electron-accepting capabilities. Corannulene - bowl-shaped fragment of C60 - has been shown to have very interesting properties and a bright future in organic materials science. For example, corannulenes have significant dipole moment; they can complex with metals, and molecular hydrogen. Corannulene derivatives have also been shown to emit blue light and are of interest in fabrication of blue light emitting diodes. Recently, liquid crystalline phases that respond to electric power have also been reported. Corannulenes can also accept four electrons and they are known to complex with molecules of fullerene C60. These studies suggest that corannulenes containing polymers may exhibit very interesting optoelectronic properties. Thus, the present proposal outlines different synthetic pathways for obtaining variety of structurally different corannulene containing macromolecules useful in optoelectronic devices. The grand challenge of this project is to develop efficient synthetic routes for obtaining well-defined macromolecules containing corannulenes moieties. New functional monomers have to be synthesized with solubilizing pendant groups; their polymerization behavior in solution and in bulk will have to be thoroughly studied. Diels-Alder polyaddition of A2-type and B2-type monomers will give rise to polymers having oxygen bridges . Dehydration reaction will then furnish fully unsaturated all-carbon polymers. We also plan to synthesize corannulene based dendritic architectures using click chemistries. Once obtained, the morphology and optoelectronic properties of these new materials will be investigated and an in-depth analysis of structure-property relationship will be established. If successful, the end materials will be very useful for the photovoltaic industry and hence will have a huge impact on environmental sustainability.
