Lead pain can be modulated by various cognitive as factors for example in the effects of distraction that reduce pain. The primary purpose of this project is d? study? influence of tasks requiring an effort of concentration on pain occurring after the task. The second goal is d? study? influence of pain on subsequent cognitive tasks. Finally, the role of the motivational factors in these reciprocal influences will be studied. Lay summary pain can be modulated by various cognitive as factors for example in the effects of distraction that reduce pain. The first goal of this project is d? study? influence of tasks requiring an effort of concentration on pain occurring after the task. Given that the modulation of pain and cognitive control involve cognitive resources and that these resources are considered as being limited, we expect that the modulation of pain is less effective and as stronger felt pain after a period of high concentration qu? after a period not requiring concentration. The second aim of this project is d? study? reciprocal influence of pain on cognitive tasks. It s? expected what? a period pain or words or images related to the pain have a negative on a cognitive task carried out subsequently influence, resulting in poorer performance or then a compensatory effort more important during the task. Finally, we predict that these effects are mainly produced by motivational factors, i.e. by the perception of the cognitive resources available rather than by the lack of? a physiological resource. Nine studies using behavioural, cardiovascular and neurological measurements will be conducted at the Faculty of psychology and Sciences of l?Education of l?University of Geneva, thus qu? to the multidisciplinary Center of the pain of the University Hospital of Geneva. From a clinical perspective, l? reciprocal influence pain and cognitive control could represent an important factor in the development and maintenance of chronic pain. Moreover, this effect could be especially sensitive for people with cognitive difficulties for various reasons (elderly, brain damage, or depressed).
