Lead L? scientific objective of this project Ambizione was to develop a new way d? apprehend Phylogeography, whereas a species as comprising a mosaic of genes, and not as a single specific unit. Indeed, since the birth of this discipline, the purpose was to describe the? history of species in l? space and in time, representing the average scenario on l? all the genes. Lay summary the different loci calling the genome of a species do not undergo the same demographic constraints, selection, and recombination. Thus, l? image d? a unique, although attractive story, n? is? an approximation of the multitude of stories associated with each region of the genome.  Until? recently, the Phylogeographic study was based on a limited number of loci, due to technological limitations. Therefore, most of the time work limited to an analysis of a few genes, if possible from different genomes (e.g. nuclear and mitochondrial). However, l? emergence d? a new generation of sequencers allowed d? open vast horizons, by multiplying the power of sequencing d? a million times. However, l? using these methods outside the context of the species model, n? is not easy, d? especially in a context where l? idea is to compare the same genetic information among a large number of specimens. A first Panel d? study of this project was to develop a method of genomic complexity reduction, to lead a genomes similarly reduced in all specimens tested, using as as target species, the troll d?Europe. After exploring the possibilities offered by pyrosequencing (Roche 454), we turned to a more powerful technology, namely the HiSeq sequencing (Illumina). We opted for a modification of the Protocol of Etter et al. (2011), using a combination d? restriction operations, d? amplification, and selection of fragment size (see Figure 1).  This method, known as 'Restricted technical Associated (RAD) tags genotyping site' uses a single restriction enzyme (single digest) and sequencing d? about 100 bp on each end of the fragments (paired-end). Once millions of sequences obtained, it s? is to group them by loci by eliminating the paralogous (namely virtual loci which would include some alleles of gene duplication), and determine the phasing of the maternal and paternal copies. The challenge bioinformatics, which was the most applicant in time and energy, allows today? today d? get clean and conservative lines at each locus, and the realized s pipeline? accommodates both data obtained with one or two restriction enzymes (double digest). The complete pipeline is still under development and will be released in the coming months. It assembles almost d? a dozen independent bookstores and handset l? State of l? art of different disciplines. Using dataset of l? species model, we found that l? history of each locus, although? independent, presents some patterns major, obtained by performing clusters d? phylogenetic trees. The next step is therefore to decrypt the demographic processes associated with these different groups of genes. As a second step, we can compare the results with those d? other species in the context of comparative phylogeography of new generation.
