Summary chronic heart disease and heart attack lead lay cause severe impairment of the heart muscle function. In the cardiogenic stem cell research developed cardiac-like cells from stem cells, aimed at improving the performance of the heart during a cell transplant. This project examines the functional properties of these heart cells. In addition to the ultimate goal of transplantation is a great interest in the stem cell research is to create cell models to investigate specific diseases, but also for quick screening of active ingredient in the pharmaceutical application. This cell models could reduce the need for animal models in the future, ensure a better (human) background for certain diseases, and accelerate the transferability of the results to human applications. Currently, already in spite of many unexplained questions regarding cardiac cells of various pluri - or multi-potent sources in use for clinical trials of cardiovascular regenerative medicine, functioning and benefits for certain heart diseases. The investigation of the electrical and mechanical properties of these cells are therefore central to this project. In heart muscle cells, the cellular calcium signal system is decisive for the contractility of the cell and the force development during muscle contraction. In this project we will investigate the bio-electrical properties of the heart cells grown from stem cells and study the physiology of calcium signals of while electrical excitation by using imaging techniques. We test the hypothesis that stem cells cultured heart cells develop mechanisms similar to physiological excitation contraction like adult cardiac myocytes and functionally linked to are. The cardiac-like cells derived from stem cells are used in transplant medicine, where these cells in heart attack patients or patients with heart failure will be injected to improve the impaired cardiac function. It is of course essential to know the precise functions of these cells (individually as well as in the cell Association) in advance and to have tested their benefits, as well as possible complications critically in all physiological conditions, before these cells can be systematically used for clinical trials. The present project serves exactly this detailed characterization and will provide an important contribution to the study of stem cells and their usefulness for the clinical regenerative medicine.
