Lead Lay summary Arc magmatism plays a key role in the evolution of the Earth as producer of continental crust and carrier of chemical elements recycled from subducted oceanic plates. Fluxes of elements through subduction zones, particularly volatile elements, have important implications for the evolution of the continental crust, volcanic eruptions, climatic changes and formation of ore deposits. In view of its scientific, environmental and economic importance, understanding subduction-related volcanism stands as one of the great challenges facing earth scientists. Because of the tectonic complexity of subduction zones, multiple components and processes compete to produce the magmas erupted from, often threatening, arc volcanoes. Decades of geochemical and petrological research have provided good constraints on the processes and components involved, however their relative contribution, interdependence and variability in space and time are open to debate. Establishing the time scales of magmatic processes is an essential step to assess their interdependence and the fluxes of melts and fluids through the crust above subduction zones. Clear understanding of the parameters controlling volcanic output rates, the functioning of subvolcanic magmatic systems, and the mechanisms controlling eruption styles is not achievable without tight constrains on the time scales involved. The short-lived isotopes produced in radioactive decay chains of Uranium and Thorium are excellent time-dependant tracers of recent geological processes. The contrasted chemical behaviour in fluids and melts, as well as the range of half-lives (75'000 years to 138 days) of the daughter nuclides make of the Uranium-series the weapon of choice to constrain the time scales of subduction zone volcanism. This project aims at addressing several fundament questions in petrology and volcanology by conducting complete U-series systematics for time series of historical eruptions from two hyper-active arc volcanoes, Volcán de Colima, Mexico and Batur volcano, Indonesia. The key innovative aspect of this project is to integrate the full spectrum of U-series nuclides measured on bulk rock samples, crystal separates and in-situ in Uranium-rich minerals with in depth mineralogical studies to a level never attempted before. This project is expected to significantly contribute to a better understanding of the time scales of the processes controlling subduction zone magmatism and of their interdependence. The outcomes are expected to improve our comprehension of the dynamics of subvocanic magmatic systems, of the fluxes of melts and fluids through these systems and of the controls this exercise on eruption style.
