Lead Lay summary Galaxies form and evolve as part of a cosmic network of gas and dark matter. This project investigates the connection between galaxies and their large-scale environment during their formation and subsequent evolution using numerical simulations.  The standard model of cosmology leads to the hierarchical assembly of matter in the Universe in an intricate network of filaments: the ?cosmic web?. Galactic structures ? from the smallest dwarf galaxies to clusters of thousands of galaxies ? form as part of this network and their assembly is deeply connected with the assembly of the cosmic web itself. However, the detailed role of this cosmic environment in the formation and subsequent evolution of galaxies is not understood. At the same time, observations indicate that the properties of galaxies, such as galaxy colors and morphologies, depend on cosmic environment and galaxy orientations are observed to be correlated over scales that are many orders of magnitude larger than the galaxies themselves. Using simulations of galaxy and cluster formation, this project will study (1) how the accretion of gas onto galaxies and mergers of galaxies are connected to the topology and the dynamic evolution of the surrounding large-scale structure; (2) how the acquisition of angular momentum of gas and dark matter and the associated formation of galactic discs is tied to the evolution of the cosmic web; (3) how the intergalactic medium evolves thermodynamically and how galaxies interact with it; and (4) how the baryonic properties of clusters of galaxies are connected to their formation history and to their cosmic environment. The research project will increase our understanding of the formation and evolution of galaxies. It will also contribute important inputs for observational cosmology by providing models that will be used in the context of efforts that aim to uncover the nature of dark energy. They require a major increase in our understanding of cosmic structure formation in order to achieve the necessary precision in their measurements. In particular, this project aims to address the impact of galaxy orientations on measurements of the weak gravitational lensing effect, and the influence of baryonic physics and environmental effects on mass estimates of galaxy clusters.
