Lead the phosphoinositide 3-kinases (PI3Ks) are a family of eight cellular enzymes grouped into three classes. The PI3Ks of class I control d? countless cellular functions such as proliferation, survival, migration. Misregulation of these enzymes by l? one of these three major stimuli can cause many diseases such as cancer or l? inflammation. Despite more d? a d decade? studies, the mechanism d? n PI3Ks activation? is not yet completely understood. Lay summary title of the research project: How phosphoinositide 3-kinases define specificity in lipid signaling how the phosphoinositide 3-kinase contribute to defining a specificity in lipid signaling. Lead the phosphoinositide 3-kinases (PI3Ks) are a family of eight cellular enzymes grouped into three classes. The PI3Ks of class I, composed of two subunits, control d? countless cellular functions such as proliferation, survival, migration. Misregulation of these enzymes is associated with many diseases such as cancer, cardiovascular disease, or l? inflammation. The four PI3Ks of class I, catalyzing the same reaction, all are enabled by three different stimulus: tyrosine kinase activity receptor, the receptor protein G (GPCRs) and G-protein coupled. Despite more d? a d decade? studies, the mechanism d? n PI3Ks activation? is not yet completely understood. Content and objectives of the research work our objective is d? identify how the PI3Ks of class I are regulated by the GPCRs as well as by their regulatory subunit. We want to get a structure three-dimensional d? a PI3Ks bound a subunit Gbetagamma (Gbg), the molecule that is transmitting the signal of the GPCRs in the PI3Ks. Many experiments in vitro and cellular complement l? structural information in order to establish and validate a model d? activation. D? on the other hand, a project involving the same methodology will be applied to the PI3Ks of class II, a class d? enzymes studied very little despite their importance in the vascularization of tumours. Scientific and social context of the research project this project will allow us to better understand the mechanism d? by the GPCRs PI3Ks activation. It will also help to identify new therapeutic targets that could contribute to the development of active molecules against cancer and l? inflammation.
