Lead lay summary Alexander von Humboldt's world physics that so-called humboldtian science, is considered to be one of the great paradigms of the 19th century The project intends to examine this paradigm in novel ways. It assumes that humboldtian science of less in the acquisition of a theoretical framework on Humboldt, as rather in aesthetic preferences, media strategies and biographical patterns, short: in an ethos. Especially among German-speaking naturalists set pieces of this ethos occur in the 19th century with astonishing frequency: the typical Humboldtians collected extensively in the tropics and lost its initial special interests mostly out of sight. He wrote monumental travelogues and had with large, partly to do insuperable difficulties of composition. He was visually experiment and operated with all available image media, especially with the young photography. He went on distance to the contemporary professionalization of science in the German-speaking universities. What is so striking and explained these patterns, is the fact that they were owed any clear theoretical intention. Instead, they had at the same time epistemic, aesthetic and ethical motives, whose Einheit last was Alexander von Humboldt in the role. The examples of typical Humboldtians are endless. The case of Hermann, Adolf, and Robert Schlagintweit may however, apply as particularly representative, three renowned Munich naturalists who traveled on behalf of the East India Company from 1854-57 through Central Asia and India. The second half of the life of the brothers was marked by rampant publication plans and try continuing to, to make a scientific and economic profit from their collection. Because is compact the Humboldt patterns in this collective biography in a unique way, and because the Schlagintweit's case is exceptionally well preserved, it should serve to explore the Constitution of the Humboldtian scientist and his specific handling of images, texts and objects. It belongs to the project in the context of the recent history of science, a compartment, beaming despite his high degree specialization in many disciplines. To the extent, as the dogma of each hermetically sealed-off two cultures - arts and Humanities, natural sciences – loses its validity, the history of science can occupy a key position within the arts and humanities.
