Lead the large Hadron Collider accesses a new energy regime allowing the production of massive particles inaccessible previous machines. In this project, the detector at the LHC ATLAS data are used to search massive particles for long service life. Confirmation or exclusion of the existence of such particles will provide a key to the investigation of fundamental questions such as the origin of dark matter. Lay summary the standard model of particle physics remarkably well describes the experimental data collected to date. Physicists believe, however, that this theory does not provide a complete description of reality. What is the origin of dark matter? How to explain the hierarchy between the masses of the elementary particles? Is it possible to describe all the interactions in a consistent manner within a same theory? These are some of the fundamental questions left unanswered by the standard model. Much of new physical theories, such as supersymmetry, have been proposed to answer these questions, but they are in need of experimental verification. Built in a tunnel 27 km at CERN near Geneva, the large Hadron Collider (LHC) has accelerated and collide the beams of protons to an energy of 7 TeV between 2010 and 2012 and will reach 14 TeV in 2015, accessing this form of energy for the first time in the laboratory. High energy collisions to study the structure of matter at its most fundamental level. In particular, they enable the production of new massive particles that were inaccessible to the previous machines. In this project, the detector at the LHC ATLAS data are used to search a certain class of particles whose existence was predicted by the new theories: stable massive particles (SMPs), that is, particles whose lifetime is long enough to leave a trace in the detector until they disintegrate. Although the planned research are designed to be sensitive to different types of SMPs in a generic manner, the discovery or exclusion of SMPs which bear a fundamental magnetic charge, called magnetic monopoles, is the major objective of this project. The magnetic monopole has been postulated by Paul Dirac in 1931 as elegantly explain quantization of electric charge, among other virtues. One of the results of the calculations of Dirac is that the basic unit of magnetic charge must correspond to many units of electric charge; the signature expected of a monopoly in a detector is therefore energy loss by ionization high along its path. The presence of monopolies is scrutinee whenever a new particle collider is built. With the LHC, we have the opportunity to explore the energy regime of the multi-TeV for the first time. New simulations must be developed to understand the response of the detector to slow and/or highly ionizing particles, and a strategy should be optimized for select interesting events among the billions of collisions recorded and minimize the rate of adverse events which mimic the new particles. To do this, we use two specific signatures: penetrating signing for low load SMPs and the signing of judgment for SMPs to high electric charge and monopolies. In addition to providing the first experimental information on magnetic monopoles at the LHC, of such analyses performed on the most recent data of ATLAS can greatly expand the potential for discovery of SMPs and thus verify or exclude models of new physics. In the case of highly ionizing particles, we want to go even further. Indeed, in its current mode of operation, the ATLAS detector can not trigger on the particles which stops before the calorimeter, as would a large part of the monopolies produced during collisions. Therefore, the proposed project includes the study of the possible extension of the ATLAS trigger system using traces of ATLAS (instead of the calorimeter) detectors to trigger on highly ionizing particles. This will require changes to the way in which electronic signals propagate within the detector, that will be made during the technical stop of the LHC in 2014. The new trigger will provide a significantly increased sensitivity for new monopoly searches to be carried out in 2015 with the LHC at 14 TeV collisions. Basic research, focused on the curiosity and knowledge, lays the foundations for long-term culture, innovation and prosperity. It is not possible to exploit laws and facts of nature which have not been discovered, and the basic science investments lead to discoveries of great practical and economic importance. Stable massive particles represent a remarkable example: for example, charged to long-lived particles could be used to catalyze nuclear fusion, and magnetic monopoles could catalyze the decay of the proton and thus provide an unlimited power supply. In addition, the special requirements of particle physics, which requires very sophisticated equipment, make it particularly suited to produce spin-offs. Finally, research in basic sciences offers an excellent motivation and training for students who will later work in applied research or development within the industry.
