Lead lay summary the Organization of contemporary art. To the prehistory of the new institutionalism at the UK's example in recent decades, the institutional landscape in art has changed markedly: the forms of production and promotion of contemporary art have not only greatly increased, they are differentiated and specialized in respect to artistic positions and content. Under the slogan of the new institutionalism these developments analysed at the same time critically in recent years as it sought new, adequate models for the organisation of contemporary art in the face of the complex and ambivalent social constellations. This current situation is the close entanglement of and the oscillation between critical practice and neo-liberal claims. At least suggest that most debates acting on this issue and they have produced equivalent topoi: about the younger institutions would be closed due to their critical activities that instead critical positions of traditional houses or the art market absorbs (or appropriated) would, and it thus came to a homogenization of the institutional landscape, or even one who that the neo-liberal motivated economizing in the art world has become the hegemonic parameter. The investigation follows these considerations with the concrete analysis of the example of London. Before the matrix of theory of radical democracy in the sense of Laclau/Mouffe, the topoi are questioned critically and in historical perspective. The aim is to make it visible again the inconsistency of the constellations and based on differentiated debating categories of who is viewing (autonomy, critical practice, cultural policy, economizing etc) accordingly again fertile to make the current situation. A particularly good example is England or London for the investigation in several ways: not only find here (already in the postwar period), also the institutional landscape in many respects is early forms of a new institutionalism long before he became the subject on the European mainland (Organization, financing, content etc.) one of the most diverse worldwide. At the same time, also the art world felt the consequences of the very early and not less radical Margret Thatcher's neo-liberal policies which are in turn but much more complex and contradictory than it is hawked in the critical debates.
