Lead Lay summary Few quantitative temperature reconstructions exist for the southern hemisphere covering the past millennium. Since the earth's climate system is controlled by the global energy balance, high-quality data from the southern hemisphere are urgently needed to fully comprehend climate variability and drivers. This project aims to provide two 1000-year long, quantitative, seasonally resolved temperature reconstructions from the Chilean Andes. Currently much effort is put into answering the question: Does the magnitude and rate of 20th Century climate change exceed natural variability over the last millennium? This is important since it provides information on the influence of e.g. anthropogenic forcing of climate, which is highly relevant for the general public and policy makers. However, climatic reconstructions of sufficient quality and resolution are scarce in the Southern Hemisphere. In addition, most climatic proxies are biased towards the warm growing season; reconstructions for the winter season are typically scarce. Recent studies have highlighted though that the amplitude and direction of climate change differs for each season. In addition, it is mostly the seasonal (or shorter) climatic events which have greater environmental and socio-economic impacts. Therefore there is a particularly strong need for data representing seasonally resolved temperature variability for the Southern Hemisphere.  
This project aims to develop two high-resolution, quantitative reconstructions of summer and winter temperature variability in the Chilean Andes during the past 1000 years based on novel methods; chrysophyte stomatocyst analysis and scanning in-situ reflectance spectrometry. A spatial training set will be developed for chrysophyte stomatocysts, based on ca. 50 lakes spaced along an altitude gradient, to allow for high-quality, quantitative winter temperature reconstructions. 
The selected study area, the  Region de Araucanía' (~37-40° S) is ideally situated to reconstruct past changes in the position and strength of the Westerly Wind Belt, which is the most important climatic driver south of ca 38° S in the Southern Hemisphere. This study will provide reconstructions of seasonal contrasts and extremes for two study sites, thus allowing for an assessment of past changes in these Westerlies. These reconstructions will also be used to put recent climatic changes in a long-term context. The temperature reconstructions will also be compared to Global Circulation Model (GCM) ensemble runs, which will provide important clues on natural and anthropogenic forcing factors.
