Lead Lay summary This project examines how institutions and politics influence the voting decision process. It investigates how the determinants of party choice vary across elections and what the implications of this variation are for the quality of democratic representation. Citizens' decisions to vote for a given party rather than one of its competitors depend on a variety of factors. Voters may follow a long-standing attachment to a given party. Or they may choose on the basis of a party's programme, and support the platform that corresponds most closely to their own positions. In doing this, they may focus on different types of political issues, linked with economic aspects (welfare state, taxes, etc.) or social-cultural ones (immigration policy, law and order, ?). Other voters may not be that much interested in the detailed policy positions, but focus more on parties' general competence, their willingness to handle important political issues, and their capacity to implement innovative and efficient solutions. Previous research has focused on the relative importance of these various decision-making strategies, and how different voters follow different decision-making strategies. This project extends on this by investigating how the voting decision process is affected by the political and institutional context. Do voters in proportional and in majoritarian elections make their voting decision using the same type of criteria? Do parties' strategic emphasis of certain issues influence how voters evaluate them? Do citizens apply different cognitive decision rules when election campaigns are more or less disputed? These are some of the central questions of this research project. Elections represent one of the most important links between citizens and government. By examining how politics and institutions affect citizens' decision-making, this project will improve our understanding of elections. It will also allow determining under which institutional and political conditions a system of democratic representation works most efficiently.
