Lead level d? inflammation of plates d? atheroma would detect those who are close to the break and to detect potential risk d? stroke or d? myocardial infarction. However, it n? there was currently no? available clinical tools d? evaluate it non-invasive way. The purpose of this project is therefore d? implement, test and validate a methodology d? magnetic resonance imaging for quantifying l? inflammation d? a plate d? atherosclerotic mice with d? atherosclerosis. Lay summary scientific context and social rupture of plaques d? atheroma usually leads to a myocardial infarction or stroke, which are, together, the first cause of death in Western society. However, the progress of plates? atheroma can be predicted with current clinical resources based on anatomical criteria. C? why this project focuses on the development d? a new technique d? (MRI) magnetic resonance imaging which l control? inflammation of plates? atheroma.  Content and objectives as a link has been established between the probability of failure d? a plate d? atheroma and rate d? inflammation, we propose d? use?IRM for viewing of nanoparticles of perfluorocarbons (PFCS) which will be retained by immune cells present in plaques. L?MRI is a safe, non-invasive technique and that n? involves no harmful radiation, similarly that PFCS are harmless molecules that have already injected in substantial doses in humans. The atoms of fluorine (19 F) present in the PFC can be imaged by MRI, with l? benefit that the PFC injected are the only sources of signal 19 F. L? d signal strength?MRI of the PFC in plate d? atheroma will show directly the level d? inflammation. The purpose of this project is therefore d? implement, test and validate a method?MRI of the 19 F and d? optimise this methodology for studies MRI using the 19 F concerning the progression and regression of l? atherosclerosis in mice. For this purpose, the technique will be validated in vitro with known solutions, and determining how the 19 F MRI signal in plates? atherosclerotic mice is associated with histological reference indices. Finally, we will check l? assumption that l?19 F MRI can detect changes in the progression of the plates in response to changes in diet and treatment using statins.
