Lead Lay summary This project focuses on the group of human disorders called ciliopathies, which are caused by dysfunction of the primary cilium, an organelle present on most vertebrate cells. Primary cilia serve as antennae transmitting sensory, mechanical or chemical information to the cell, depending on the cell's specific functions. Patients suffering from ciliopathies can have a variety of clinical presentations, including symptoms such as retinal degeneration, cystic kidney disease, brain malformations and/or cognitive dysfunction. However, patients harboring mutations in the same gene, including different members from a single family, can have different symptoms and it is extremely difficult to predict the effect of mutations in a ciliary gene in a given individual. The reason underlying this variability is unclear, but it is thought that the phenotype is influenced not only by mutations in one ciliary gene (considered as the causal gene) but also by all other sequence variants in other ciliary genes acting as genetic modifiers . The goal of this project is to test this hypothesis using a combined approach based on human genetics, focusing on one typical ciliopathy (Joubert syndrome), and zebrafish as a model organism.  Joubert syndrome is a ciliopathy characterized by a distinctive hindbrain malformation (?molar tooth sign?) accompanied by intellectual disability and ataxia, as well as variable retinal dystrophy, microcystic kidney and liver disease and skeletal abnormalities. Both phenotypic variability and genetic heterogeneity are prominent in JS and most of the 18 genes associated with Joubert Syndrome also cause other ciliopathies such as nephronophthisis, Leber congenital amaurosis or Meckel syndrome, leading to the term ?Joubert syndrome and related disorders? .  The zebrafish has emerged as a major model for human development and disease thanks to its rapid external development and its accessibility to genetic analysis and manipulation. It is particularly well suited for the investigation of genetic modifiers thanks to oligo-nucleotide (?morpholino?) gene knock-down, which allows titrated manipulation of several genes in one organism. Phenotypic analysis is facilitated by transparency of the embryos providing excellent imaging conditions for direct observation of developmental processes under the microscope, and robust transgenesis techniques allowing in vivo examination of fluorescent markers tagging ciliary proteins of interest.  This project has broad implications for human disease. It will enhance our understanding of ciliary biology and improve our ability to provide accurate prognostic information for patients with ciliopathies. This in turn will guide clinical management of patients and family planning decisions. Reaching beyond the field of ciliopathies, understanding the effect of genetic modifiers in Joubert Syndrome can serve as a model for understanding the effects of multiple sequence variants on the phenotype, a problem that has become critical in the era of whole exome and genome sequencing.    
