Lead Lay summary breastfeeding is responsible for up to a third of the child HIV transmissions. This project analyzes prevention policies from a perspective of historical, political and social anthropology of human reproduction, science and public health for infant feeding. While in Europe, North America and the Japan, the risk of transmission of HIV to the child has been reduced less than 2%, one thousand children are infected every day in developing countries where the vast majority of HIV-positive women in the world. Apart from any preventive measure, breastfeeding is responsible for up to a third of cases of mother-to-child transmissions. However, breastfeeding remains vital in economic, health, social environments and policies adverse to alternative milks. In these contexts, the World Health Organization recommends exclusive breastfeeding for the first six months, a food mode that allows for reasons still poorly elucidated, reduce the risk of transmission - compared to mixed feeding that exposes the child to a maximum risk. The dilemma is that the majority of companies that advocates breastfeeding with early introduction of other liquids or food. Exclusive breastfeeding is more consistent with a scientific reinvention of nature, whose sustainable implementation large scale proves to be problematic on logistics and social. If experts highlight the risks and dilemmas related to the absence of breastfeeding, the difficulties in? work from prolonged exclusive breastfeeding are little understood and little discussed. The objective of this research project is to analyze the scientific and political prevention dynamics that resulted in the development of exclusive breastfeeding as a public health measure into the contexts of HIV. This study aims at the same time an anthropological understanding of reproduction and feeding practices infant that notions of culture or genre obscure rather than they illuminate. Theoretically, this research participates in an analysis critical of the co-construction of the socio-political dynamics of complex sciences, natures et sociétés, beyond fractures between the countries of the North and the South. Through this analysis, this project aims to contribute to the prevention of the transmission of HIV through breastfeeding in particular and the reproductive, maternal and child health in general.
