Lead lay summary Apuleius of travelling (in the present-day Algeria) was one of the most important Roman writers. He lived in the 2nd century A.d., a period of well-received 240th lately, where the pagan literature experienced its last great flowering. The metamorphoses ("metamorphoses"), the only completely preserved Latin novel of antiquity are Apuleius' Magnum Opus. In this novel, the curious protagonist Lucius accidentally turns into a donkey, and experienced in this form a series of adventures, until he once again becomes a human at the end by the grace of the goddess ISIS. You can read this novel very unscientific and enjoy. If you questioned him and tried to understand its historical context, a number of problems, such as intention, cultural context, or genus historical classification set. My project sought, v.a with two approaches to the understanding of this work and the literary Gattung(en), it belongs to which to put on a new footing. (1) any understanding of a literary work should take into account its historical self-image. I have therefore developed the material to a monograph on the literary self-image of metamorphosis in their time. My thesis is that the relatively young genre of the novel of Apuleius stimulated to an on the one hand genus moderate stylistically, on the other hand philosophical experiment, reflect important discourses of the education movement (the so-called Second Sophistic). (2) the religious end of metamorphosis is particularly controversial. An international research group, I have edited six of the thirty chapters of the 11th and last book of the metamorphoses of a new comment. This comment is differ from older comments especially, that he takes into account the decidedly literary (and not only historical-religious historical) character of the text.The comment will appear as the last volume in the series of Groningen commentaries on Apuleius. As a useful by the way my processing of secondary literature to the metamorphoses an extensive database emerged eventually, in all titles are briefly characterized and assessed. One or more research reports can emerge from the material of this database in the future.
