Lead is clear that new threats to public safety often have a transnational origin since the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. In other words, the national public security is threatened by cross-border threats. Transnational organized crime, as well as an increased vulnerability of so-called critical infrastructure (about the Internet) by a growing international network these include in addition to transnational terrorism. Lay summary that is law of public security (i.e., the Rechtsbereich who did it with the management of risks related to legal interests such as life, to freedom and the functioning of State institutions do) increasingly characterized by transnational standards by standards, that a cross-border application or effect have, such as the European Union, but also of international law. The project examines the legal issues associated with this transnationalization.   In the debate on ensuring the transnational public safety issues of the protection of human rights come tend to be too short. The question is therefore, as adequate protection of human rights in the process of the transnationalization of the security right can be guaranteed. Eventually involves the general question of how processes of transnationalization of standards are structured. The aim of the research project is an inventory and systematization transnational norms in the field of public safety first. Secondly, the human limits of transnational security cooperation. Thirdly the transnationalization will be explained rechtssoziologisch of standards in the area of public security.    The research project going on a positivistic, by it sifts through the existing standards in the field of transnational public security law. Thus, the project will contribute to systematize a previously diffuse and confusing area of the law. On the other hand the project also takes critical to the process of transnationalization of public security law. This criticism can be significant for the further integration of Switzerland in existing and evolving bilateral, regional and international cooperation in the area of security.  
