Lead Lay summary Today's technological goal can be summarized in three words: smaller, faster, and cheaper. Not only can stencil lithography (SL) provide major advantages in all three domains, but it can also open completely new paths in the field of nanofabrication. The standard way of fabricating micro and nanodevices involves spinning a polymer layer on top of a Si wafer, exposing parts of it to radiation, and removing the resist parts which have been exposed by dipping the wafer in a chemical solution. SL is a resist-less technique which can integrate patterning in one step at micro- and nano-scales. It consists of selectively depositing and etching material through a stencil (membrane with apertures) located in close proximity to a substrate. At the end of the process, the aperture pattern in the stencil is transferred into the substrate, the stencil can be removed, and the substrate wafer is ready for the next processing step. Although the technique is quick and clean, several challenges remain to be addressed. When the thickness of the deposited material is comparable to the aperture size, the apertures can become clogged due to the adhesion of material on their side walls. Another important aspect of SL is blurring, i.e. the distortion of the pattern when transferred from stencil to substrate. This phenomenon depends on the setup geometry and on the material itself. Some of SL's unique applications include: 3D nanopatterning (AFM tip patterning, NEMS on CMOS, microlens nanopatterning), depositing un-conventional (e.g. organic) materials on un-conventional substrates (e.g. PDMS, PET, polymide, functionalized surfaces), and the easy creation of customized prototypes via dynamic SL (one can write any arbitrary pattern with the material deposited through a hole in a membrane, while the stencil trajectory follows the desired path). The goal of this proposed research is exploring the limits imposed by clogging and blurring on nanostencil lithography, culminating with the development of a self-cleaning nanostencil, which allow in-situ multi-layer multi-pattern surface structuring using (quasi)dynamic SL.
