Lead the proposed research to aim to improve the theoretical understanding of the plasma of quark and gluon, a present state of matter at very high temperature at the beginning of the universe. This plasma maybe reproduced in the laboratory in collisionant highly accelerated heavy ions. Lay summary in collisionant of heavy ions, the macroscopic properties of the formed plasma can be deduced its overall development and the study of tests which it modifies. Ideal tests are naturally present in collisions, heavy quarks or States of heavy quarks. For theoretical physics, the challenge is to understand how the macroscopic properties of plasma, for example the transport coefficients, emerging fundamental laws governing the basic connections between the quarks and gluons: Quantum Chromodynamics. The first part of is project follows an idea that we have proposed recently which allows to determine the transport coefficients by combining two of the main methods of calculations, the perturbation theory and simulations on network. The goal is to get the electrical conductivity and the diffusion coefficient of light and heavy quarks as well as the dependence of the latter depending on the speed of the quark.  In a second step, States bound by the heavy quarks will be considered. It is assumed that they dissolve at high temperature, to define a thermometer for plasma measuring temperatures of the order of tens of degrees ridges. These bound States are described by Schrödinger equation whose potential is obtained by Quantum Chromodynamics. The existing theoretical approach is very promising but must be refined to be able to be used in phenomenology. Among other inclusions of the mixture between the various States of the colours and the possibility of recombination of differentiated quarks must be taken into account.  The last component of this project will attempt to solve an experimental puzzle. Asymmetries in the distribution of electric charges are observed experimentally. It does not respect the symmetry of parity and remain for misunderstood time. A possible explanation could be given by the chiral magnetic effect and the effect of Chiral separation, a new effect that we have recently proposed. These effects have to source the Chiral anomaly, a symmetry breaking in Quantum Chromodynamics and this purely quantum mechanical origin in electromagnetic quantum. Different steps are proposed to reduce uncertainties about the magnitude of the effect and allow a quantitative comparison with experiment. Clear observation of this phenomenon will also contribute to a better understanding of the formation of material at the beginning of the universe.
