

 The main objective of the Action  is to increase the knowledge on the mathematical methods able to estimate the cortical activity and connectivity in the human brain from non invasive neuroelectric and hemodynamic measurements. Additional objectives include the developing of new techniques for the multimodal integration of neuroelectromagnetic and hemodynamic measurements, and their application in several contexts, from the study of human cortical activity during cognitive tasks to the field of the brain computer interface. The NEUROMATH Action  aimed to develop an European networks in the neuroscience field which, if possible, should become reference in Europe and contribute to the scientific development of the domain. Scientific research will address questions in the areas listed below. 1. Development of new techniques for the estimation of brain activity and connectivity One of the main objective of this area of research is to increase the knowledge about the accuracy that is possible to obtain for the estimation of brain activity from separate neuroelectric and hemodynamic non invasive recordings. In particular, the possibility is addressed to estimate the cortical activity in selected cortical regions of interest from non invasive scalp EEG recordings. This objective is fundamental since the activity of the brain is generated from the brain and not from the scalp, where it is usually represented. Definitive measure of estimation errors for cortical estimation from non-invasive EEG measurements are to be obtained. Another important goal of this area of research is to increase the knowledge about the estimation of the functional brain connectivity, i.e. how and how much particular regions of the brain cooperate together during cognitive and motor tasks. 2. Multimodal integration of neuroelectric and hemodynamic data. The main objective of this area of research is to understand if the integration of the neuroelectric and hemodynamic measurements improves effectively the estimation of the brain cortical activity and connectivity with respect to the estimation that could be performed using only one separate modality (i.e EEG or fMRI). The benefits are in terms of increased understanding of the physiologic link between hemodynamic and neuroelectric phenomena. 3. Non invasive study of motor and cognitive brain The main objective of this area of research is to understand if the knowledge about basic motor and cognitive processes in humans could be improved by using the advanced mathematical tools developed and tested during this Action , when compared with those already obtainable with standard EEG and fMRI methods. The benefits are in terms of increased understanding of human basic cognition mechanisms. 4. Application of advanced techniques for estimation of brain activity in the brain computer interface area An increased capability to estimate brain activity from non invasive neuroelectric and hemodynamic measurements is opening the way for new scientific research areas. The main objective of this area of research is to increase the knowledge about the use of the brain signals to drive directly external devices, such as virtual keyboards or neuroprosthetic arms without any overt muscle movements. The benefits are in terms of a new class of devices and services driven directly by mental thoughts. 5. Outcomes of the project The implementation of each of these instruments has a considerable impact on the way EEG, and fMRI research is done and organised in Europe. The consulting expertise of the NEUROMATH Action  members may help establish a reliable and efficient pan-European bridge between industrial companies and academic institutions. Moreover, a substantial progress in theoretical and applied research is expected from the direct collaboration between most of the partners from several disciplines and the European industries in the field of neuroelectric and hemodynamic measurement devices.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM0601    

 The main objective of the Action  is to advance our knowledge on the pathogenesis and prevention of obesity and the specific role of adipose tissue in the development of the metabolic syndrome. This approach is driven by the hypothesis that adipose tissue is critically involved in transducing environmental and nutritional factors into endogenous signals which mediate insulin resistance, vascular complications, beta cell dysfunction and the manifestation of type 2 diabetes. To reach the overall goal of this project, a multidisciplinary network will address the following secondary objectives: 1. Analysis of the central regulation of food intake and adipocyte storage function The main objective of this part of the Action  is to identify new molecular targets that may serve to control food intake and to prevent the development of the metabolic syndrome. One aim is related to the elucidation of the links between neuroendocrine dysregulation and adipose tissue secretory function and inflammation. Specifically, different neuroendocrine systems (cortisol axis, sex hormones, renin-angiotensin system) will be addressed and their impact for the aetiology of the metabolic syndrome will be evaluated. An additional specific objective is to promote our knowledge on glucose sensing systems and their role in the control of energy homeostasis and body weight. This includes attempts to identify hypothalamic genes with specific function for glucose sensing. A related aim is to study the dysregulation of hypothalamic nutrient sensing focusing on fatty acids. Furthermore, it is known that hypothalamic systems involved in energy balance and appetite regulation are subject to profound gender differences. Specific aims are to identify the molecular basis of this gender-related difference and its impact for obesity and type 2 diabetes. Adipose cell size is critically related to glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity. Therefore, a major goal is to understand how hypertrophy of adipose cells leads to impaired lipid storage capacity, impaired adipogenesis and systemic insulin resistance. 2. Elucidation of adipose tissue secretory function Adipose tissue is considered as a major endocrine organ. Advanced knowledge on this endocrine activity under normal and pathological conditions is of key importance for developing new strategies to combat major metabolic diseases related to adipose tissue dysfunction. Therefore, the main objective of this research task is to comprehensively explore the regulation of adipose tissue secretory function, the origin of secretory products within the tissue, the actions of these products at the local and peripheral levels and the pathophysiological relevance for humans. Additional objectives include the identification of novel secretory products and the investigation of the pathophysiological role of the adipose tissue and its secretory products in human or animal models of the metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes. Additional attempts will be made to define the secretory activity of different fat depots and their impact for the aetiology of the metabolic syndrome. Additional aims are to identify variants of genes coding for adipose secretory products, an important step towards defining new biomarkers of the metabolic syndrome. Finally, attempts will be made to better understand plasticity of adipose tissue, which may represent a new approach to prevention of the metabolic syndrome. 3. Assessment of the relationship between cytokines, inflammation and vascular dysfunction and skeletal muscle insulin resistance The combined effects of peripheral insulin resistance and vascular disease is devastating as it promotes uncontrolled hyperglycemia and damaging effects on peripheral organs and beta cells. It further promotes endothelial cell dysfunction towards the appearance of pre-atherosclerotic lesions and overt atherosclerosis accompanied with cardiac complications. One main objective is to identify the downstream targets of the crosstalk between adipose tissue-derived proinflammatory cytokines and vascular endothelial and smooth muscle cells. This will be essential to develop new therapeutic strategies for prevention of the secondary complications associated with the metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes. Attempts will also be made to uncover potential synergistic interactions between cytokines, hyperglycemia and increased levels of free fatty acids. This knowledge will help to improve therapeutic measures and patient stratification. A second main objective is to define the molecular targets involved in the initiation of skeletal muscle insulin resistance. This knowledge is essential for developing novel drug and life-style intervention strategies. 4. Gluco-lipotoxcity, islet inflammation, beta cell dysfunction and type 2 diabetes Multifactorial stressful stimuli are harmful to beta cells and affect their survival and function. Progressive damage and deterioration of these cells lead to decreased beta cell mass, altered insulin biosynthesis and impaired glucose-regulated insulin secretion. The main objective is to expand the current research on glucose- and free fatty acid-induced damage to beta cells to the role of adipose tissue-derived factors (i.e., proinflammatory cytokines) on the function of beta cells in such adverse environment. Detailed understanding of the molecular mechanisms that lead to beta cell apoptosis and dysfunction is essential for developing new strategies to prevent or delay the onset of type 2 diabetes. This knowledge will also help to define new biomarkers that may serve to identify patients at high risk for developing type 2 diabetes. Another important objective is to investigate and validate a current hypothesis that some harmful proinflammatory cytokines are produced by beta cells or islets exposed to hyperglycemia or fatty acids. The differentiation between effects of locally produced cytokines and adipose-tissue derived cytokines may provide better understanding of beta cell dysfunction and may lead to selective approaches to ameliorate the harmful consequences of each.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM0602    

 The Main Objective of the Action  is to gain new understanding of neuroinflammatory and neurodegenerative processes as they occur in multiple sclerosis and Alzheimer's disease, so as to facilitate development of improved therapies by drawing together knowledge from study of individual diseases. The Operational Goal of this Action  is to create a network of basic scientists and clinical researchers with expertise in inflammation and degenerative disease of the brain, in order to: 1. Integrate studies, approaches and techniques for study of neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration, 2. Train young researchers by cross-cutting exposure to all aspects of these two major diseases, and, 3. Provide scientific insight that guides clinical research and practice. Targeted goals within this operational framework To improve and integrate understanding of these diseases with specific reference to: - Gene expression/repression in disease - Blood-brain interactions - Cellular dynamics of inflammation in the CNS - Demyelinating pathology - Degenerative pathology - Inflammation-associated neurodegeneration and regeneration - Glial responses and signalling - Immune regulation - Neuro- and glio-genesis and cell replacement The components listed are crucial to success, as well as realistic in view of the expertise in participating laboratories and groups to be recruited. These components are combined to address key questions that guide development of therapies for MS and AD as well as other major neurological diseases in adults.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM0603    

 The main objective of the Action  is to promote a scientific and medical interactive European effort in the multidisciplinary field of myelin-related pathologies in order to develop new therapeutic strategies for the largest number of patients. Synergies are critically important for progress in the field. Although the frequency of all leukodystrophies is estimated to be around 1/8000, every single disease is rare. Generation of meaningful, in particular clinical data therefore depends on the interaction of groups form various countries contributing their data and knowledge about specific diseases to a common network. For this purpose the MYELINET Action  is to gather at the appointment of the COST Action  33 research and medical groups from 11 Europeans countries covering various aspects of cell biology, genetics, transcriptomics, proteomics, neuro-imaging and development of therapeutic interventions in myelin disorders. The objectives to reach by this multidisciplinary approach are to: - Identify the cause of leukodystrophies of undetermined origin and gain a better understanding of disorders related to myelin loss or failure of development; - Explore the pathophysiological pathways involved in such pathologies; - Discover of novel biomarkers to act as diagnostic/follow up tools or drug targets; - Develop, validate and use new diagnostic and prognostic tools; - Promote drug development and inovative therapeutic strategies; - Debate ethical and societal implications and concerns; - Disseminate scientific data and information to the public. 1. Identification of the causes and exploration of the pathophysiological pathways These two objectives are the first research steps required to make significant therapeutic advances for all types of white matter disorders. The COST Action  is to provide exchange of knowledge and technical tools already developed at the European level to support the group of white matter diseases in which research is less advanced, particularly white matter disease of the premature, or leukodystrophies recently identified or of undetermined origins. The inter-disciplinary Action  of MYELINET is also to promote the scientific progress which has already been made in recent years for other groups of myelin diseases as MS and several leukodystrophies (ALD, MLD, PMD). A key point for direct application of research to human pathology is the possibility to select homogeneous and well phenotyped groups of affected patients/families not only for genetic studies (identification of responsible genes in monogenic leukodystrophies, identification of genetic variants contributing to phenotypic variability) but also to correlate results obtained in cellular and animal models with human pathology. The critical mass which is aimed to be provided through the COST Action  is particularly important. The discovery of new genes in leukodystrophies or of new physiopathological mechanisms is an important objective not only for the families individually affected by the corresponding disease, but also for the whole scientific and medical community working in the field of glial cell biology and white matter diseases. Achieving a critical mass of scientists in this field will help to decipher the important role of unsuspected molecules and cellular pathways to unravel the complexity of the white matter physiology and impairment in acquired and genetic diseases of white matter. 2. Discovery of novel biomarkers to act as diagnostic and prognostic tools and develop new drug targets The active development of microarray and bioinformatic technology during this last 5 years has provided major progress in the possibilities to screen in humans as well as in animal models the whole genome (genomics) and all the transcripts produced or regulated by these genes (transcriptomics). Moreover, the possibilities to fractionate proteins (proteomics) produced or regulated by these transcripts in cell or tissue extracts, or in various biological fluids (urine, plasma, serum, cerebro-spinal fluid) have provided additional perspectives towards diagnosis and treatment. Identification of biomarkers for known pathophysiological conditions like cancer is now routinely used in clinics. These new screening tools , however, use expensive technologies and equipment and require a critical mass of expertise. In the field of myelin orphan diseases, the COST Action  supports a coordinated Action  to define at the European level the existing state of the art facilities for a more efficient access and sharing of data as well as the need to develop new technical platforms. The exchange between participants through the COST Action  will optimize the transfer of results from animal or cellular models to human or vice versa the validation of the results found in humans to animal models. Involvement of European Biotech companies in the Action  will facilitate the rapid application for diagnostic purposes. 3. Promotion of drug development and innovative therapeutic strategies Fundamental research has brought new hopes in myelin related disorders by demonstrating the potential of stem cells and numerous molecules to regenerate the myelin sheath and the axon. The COST Action  will stimulate scientific and technological interactions with the aim to focus the efforts toward clinical applications in white matter disorders. High throughput screening of libraries of compounds is now possible using cellular or yeast models allowing a selection for those with potential therapeutic interest that can then be tested in cellular and animal experimental paradigms. Cellular factory platforms are also needed to expand and characterize cells with regenerating capacities for myelin and axons. As for genomic, transcriptomic and proteomic research, access to technical platforms more specifically dedicated to the COST consortium will facilitate and accelerate the design of new drugs and cellular products and their approval for clinical applications. The development of therapeutic drugs that include cell therapy products for human disease is a long process. It requires optimizeation of tests to be done in animal models relevant for the pathology according to protocols closest to conditions required for human clinical trials. Synergism between research, technological and medical groups established through this COST Action  will greatly help to bring the gap between proof of concept, drug design and the development of the first clinical trials evaluating the safety and efficacy of these new therapeutic products. 4. Debate ethical and societal implications and concerns of results and assure their scientific dissemination Advances in life sciences and biotechnology should be developed in a responsible way in harmony with ethical values and societal goals. This concern is particularly important in gene testing and innovative therapeutic technologies using new molecules or regeneration/reparation of human brain. MYELINET is dedicated to a large group of devastating orphan diseases with severe functional and vital prognosis. This requires even stronger coordinated actions for responsible, science based and people centred policies on ethical basis. Interactions between patients and their families with medical and research groups have largely demonstrated their effectiveness for this purpose. Active involvement of a non-for-profit research foundation (ELA Foundation) which has narrow links with patients and families affected by genetic leukodystrophies at a European level will strongly support this objective in the COST Action . Patients and relatives will directly benefit from the information dissemination program. Scientific dissemination of knowledge in a coordinated, accessible and multidisciplinary approach is to provide benefit to: - Researchers in the field No regular meeting devoted to orphan myelin diseases in the scope of the MYELINET Action  exists at the European level. Involvement of many MYELINET participants to EC integrated projects devoted to specific myelin diseases will facilitate this scientific dissemination. The MYELINET Action  will play a precursor entrepreneurial role for subsequent European grant applications, particularly for the FP7  program - New scientists An important aim of MYELINET COST Action  is to attract young scientists in the innovative field of therapy of brain disorders but also to teach them new technologies using genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic, NMR, stem cells, screening of libraries of compounds. Established scientists in completely different fields will be another scope of this COST Action . New ideas tend to emerge at the junction of specialisation. Training across disciplines and specialisation is to be promoted including the potential for take-up of information and communication technologies through one of the SME involved in the Action . Synergisms will emerge with the development of new research and communication programs. - European biotechnology SMEs or pharmaceutical companies The MYELINET Actions  must take the capacity to translate knowledge from research into new products, processes and services for patient benefits. The MYELINET inter-disciplinary Action , aims not only to prevent and cure specific diseases such as white matter disease of the premature and leukodystrophies, but also to serve as a seed to extend validated strategies (in particular myelin repair) to other myelin disorders such as MS and spinal cord injury in collaboration with biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies. The critical mass of patients registered according to consensus protocols and analysed using innovative diagnostic/prognostic tools serves as the best assets. The critical mass of patients registered according to consensus protocols and analysed using innovative diagnostic/prognostic tools will be constitute the best assets. - Patients and their families Major aspects of the dissemination activities also focus on exchange of information with affected patients and their families. This is to include the organisation of information days open to a broad audience in the frame of annual meetings, communication with the media and documentation made available through the MYELINET web-site (see http://www.myelinet.eu). In conclusion, MYELINET will link scientists, medical doctors, patients and families to talk and learn from each other, providing an international collaborative network that will bring together experts in neurology, neurosciences, genetics, experts in gene analysis, protein, NMR, drug discovery and drug development. The Action  will leverage investigation of myelin diseases, identify new drug and diagnostic targets, stimulate the development of innovative therapeutic approaches. It will contribute to the medical scientific, economic and social development of Europe and strengthen Europe s competitiveness.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM0604    

 The main objective of the Action  is to increase the understanding of (1) the defining features, (2) the behavioural markers, (3) the computational principles, and (4) the neural mechanisms associated with conscious experience in humans and animals, and to identify the clinical, societal, and ethical implications of such findings. Secondary Objectives  To contribute to the understanding assessment, and treatment of disorders of consciousness, including (1) coma, minimally conscious state, and vegetative state conditions, and (2) certain psychiatric diseases (e.g., schizophrenia) - To promote the emergence of a consensus on the definition of consciousness - To improve both behavioural and brain imaging methods used to explore differences between conscious and unconscious information processing - To improve the design of educational curricula based on current neuroscientific knowledge - To translate neuroscientific knowledge about subjective experience to fields where it can provide wide human benefit, such as education or mental health care. As stated above, the central objective of the Action  is, essentially, to contribute to the understanding of mechanisms associated with consciousness. This is achieved by coordinating ongoing research dedicated to consciousness in Europe so as to make it possible to achieve the close interdisciplinary interactions that are necessary to advance knowledge in the domain. In particular, the Action  aims (1) to create, on a European scale, a network of active researchers in the domain, and (2) to foster interactions between junior and senior scientists so as to contribute to the emergence of a consciousness  community in Europe. The means to achieve these objectives are essentially consisting in: 1. bi-annual Training Schools 2. bi-annual Scientific Dissemination Meetings 3. Annual Working Group Meetings focused on horizon-scanning and identifying innovative collaborations 4. Short-Term Scientific Missions implementing identified collaborations 5. The creation of electronic tools to facilitate interactions and knowledge building: A web site providing detailed information about ongoing research, conferences, training opportunities, as well as a basis for forum discussions (tentative); several mailing lists; an e-print archive. The target audience of the Action  is essentially the transdisciplinary scientific community from the many disciplines for which conscious experience and its neurobiological bases are central research topics (neuroscience, psychology, philosophy, psychiatry etc.), with a specific focus on junior scientists. Because the proposed Action  also has societal relevance, it is also targeted towards the educational and mental health care communities. Relevant deliverables resulting from the Action  include (1) scholarly publications in leading journals, (2) prospective foresight documents from Working Group Meetings, Conferences, and Training School proceedings, (3) high-level training opportunities for junior scientists.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM0605    

 1. Main Objective The main objective of this Action  is to provide reliable breast cancer risks associated with genetic variants, through collaborative epidemiological studies. Specifically, one aims to provide an evaluation of at least 60 genetic variants over the period of this Action . 2. Secondary objectives - To examine the combined effects of multiple risk factors. - To evaluate interactions between genetic and lifestyle risk factors. - To evaluate the evidence for genetic associations in particular subsets of breast cancer. - To examine evidence for associations between these variants and survival from breast cancer. - To facilitate exchange of expertise in genotyping technologies and analysis among participating countries. 3. Deliverables - Estimates of breast cancer risk, by age, associated with 60+ polymorphisms - Estimates of the combined effects of disease associated polymorphisms on breast cancer risk. - Risk estimates by genotype for each subtype of breast cancer. - Risk estimates by genotype and known lifestyle risk factors.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM0606    

 The main objective of this Action  is to improve the potential of cancer therapy through the development and application of innovative vectors labelled with therapeutic radionuclides for targeted radionuclide therapy  of disseminated cancer. The vectors used may be based on monoclonal antibodies (or derivatives thereof), peptides, peptidomimetics, affibodies, amino acids or small organic molecules with well-defined tumour associated molecular targets. Besides the therapeutic probes, also imaging probes based on the same vectors are developed/applied in order to allow pre-therapeutic imaging for patient-specific dosimetry and therapy planning as well as for therapy monitoring. Recent advances in proteomics and genomics help to define new target molecules. Innovations are expected in such areas as ligand design, chemical ligation methods, radionuclide production, radionuclide generator design, etc. Although European laboratories have been responsible for many of the developments in targeted radionuclide therapy (including the discovery of monoclonal antibodies), the only two registered innovations in the field have come from the US. Therefore, it is crucial to develop stronger links amongst European scientists. The early involvement of the pharmaceutical industry/small companies with special expertise is fostered, also to promote implementation of the processes by insuring reliable, safe and standardized (e.g. GLP, GMP) methods. The Action  is highly interdisciplinary and includes nuclear medicine physicians, clinical oncologists, surgeons, physicists, radiobiologists, (in)organic chemists, radiochemists, radiopharmacists, pathologists and scientists from biomics. This combination results in a better insight into all aspects of the field Targeted Radionuclide Therapy . The Action  puts specific emphasis on the translation of preclinical research (i.e. new targets, radionuclides and compounds, dosimetric models and cellular/animal models) into the clinical practice of targeted radionuclide therapy. The techniques developed have an impact on the design of other ligand-targeted therapies such as ligand-toxin and ligand-chemotherapeutic agent conjugates. Direct Scientific Objectives: - To define new targets and new vectors - To synthesize and radiolabel new vectors - To evaluate the new vectors in e.g. pharmacokinetic, dosimetric and therapeutic studies and using animal imaging instrumentation - To advance targeted radionuclide therapy to a high scientific and technical status Additional Objectives: - To evaluate, coordinate and disseminate the acquired knowledge - To support the establishment of new SMEs, new (standardized) methods, new networks, etc - To contribute to/stimulate training through STSMs, participation of young scientists, etc. The ultimate goal and benefit of the Action  is the improvement of patient care; especially those patients who currently lack any effective therapy options for the treatment of their condition.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM0607    

 The main objective of the Action  is to create a framework that involves collaboration between experts in the many fields of science necessary for understanding efflux-mediated resistance at the molecular and genetic levels and to translate this knowledge into the development of diagnostic tests and antimicrobials that will, in the future, help control MDR infectious diseases throughout Europe. Multidrug resistant (MDR) bacteria constitute an ever-increasing threat to public health. The principal mechanism of MDR is the active expulsion of drugs by bacterial pumps that expel unrelated compounds. A coordinated European effort is urgently needed for the control of drug efflux mechanisms that mediate resistance against all antibiotic families in bacterial pathogens. The COST Action  will originally include scientists from 19 EU countries with competences ranging from clinical bacteriology to chemical synthesis. Its sub-objectives are to determine prevalence and evolution of bacterial drug efflux mechanisms, identify risk factors, decipher genetic regulation of this mechanism, elucidate the functional and structural bases of efflux resistance, and to synthesize and evaluate molecules that obviate efflux-mediated resistance. About 40 teams will constitute 4 initial Working Groups: Clinical and veterinary bacteriology; Molecular basis of drug efflux; Structural genomic, bioinformatics and molecular modelling; Production of new molecules, chemosensitizers or inhibitory agents. This multi- and interdisciplinary approach will identify new targets and provide a generation of effective agents against efflux mechanisms in MDR bacterial pathogens. Keywords: Multidrug resistance and pathogenic bacteria, drug efflux and membrane transport proteins, structural genomics and structural biology, chemistry and rational design, purification and/or synthesis of inhibitors/ chemosensitisers of drug efflux       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM0701    

 The main objective of the Action  is to to catalyze translational research in kidney diseases via standardization in all aspects of urine and kidney proteomics analysis from specimen collection and databasing up to data processing and analysis. Renal diseases constitute a major health threat in all societies. Proteomics is the large-scale analysis of the proteins of biological samples. Application of pro-teomics methodo-logies in the investigation of renal diseases will catalyze the development of optimal diagnostic and prognostic tests. Despite preliminary successful efforts, the interactions between the multidisciplinary teams of scientists working on kidney diseases and proteomics are still limited in Europe. EuroKUP will foster the generation of a strong and growing multi disciplinary network of scientists from at least 20 European countries, focusing on renal and urine proteomics. The objectives of the Action  focus on the identification of reference clinical centres for major kidney diseases and establishment of uniform clinical databases, standardization and optimization of procedures, integration of data to systems biology approaches and dissemination of information for application to diagnostic/prognostic procedures. Multiple scientific, technological and societal benefits to the European Union are expected, including but not limited to setting the urgently needed standards for clinical proteomics and translational research and improving the clinical situation in chronic renal diseases. Keywords: Kidney, Urine, Clinical Proteomics, Standardization, Network       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM0702    

 The main objective of the Action  is to advance our knowledge on mechanisms that protect healthy cells from transforming into cancer cells. This Action  will provide an interaction platform for research focused on genomic integrity and epigenetics and their dysregulation in cancer. The Action  will combine expertise in the fields of DNA damage response, transcriptional control, chromatin organization, and cancer epigenetics, and explore the mechanisms underlying normal and deregulated functions. It will combine multidisciplinary expertise in biochemical, biological and functional genomics approaches and in exploiting animal models. The Action  will link experts in basic sciences with approaches in translational cancer research. Due to the highest clinical significance of understanding of the molecular basis of cancer progression, it will be of vital importance for the European researchers to develop strong points of interaction to provide them with a competitive edge, new research models and tools in cancer research. Keywords: DNA damage, repair, checkpoints, chromatin, transcription, translation, epigenetics, animal models       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM0703    

 1. Main/primary objectives The main objective of the Action  is to create a structure in which researchers in the field of EMF and health can share knowledge and information on: 1. How existing EMF technologies change either in their operating characteristics or in novel ways and applications in which they are used 2. Identifying what entirely new EMF technologies are introduced and on what time-scale 3. What novel emission and operating characteristics might result and what impact these would have on the device-specific and overall EMF exposure of people 4. What possible health effects could consequently arise and the scientific evidence for health concerns if any 5. How such concerns should be addressed through the use of evidence-based information and 6. What tools are effective in communicating and managing such risks and perceived risks. And, effectively publish all such information in the public sector for the benefit of all stakeholders. 2. Secondary objectives Secondary objectives of the Action  are: - To facilitate cooperation and knowledge sharing amongst multidisciplinary EMF and health researchers across Europe, and include new researchers in the process, in particular those from new EU member states. Emphasis will also be placed on helping early-stage researchers, including post graduate students, to present and discuss their work and learn from experienced researchers in the various fields of activity. Primary end users are scientific researchers. - To enlarge the field of cooperation to other disciplines. This to include researchers in wireless engineering, sensor development, medicine, epidemiology, biology, dosimetry, risk analysis, communication and public health. Primary end users are scientific researchers. - To identify where answers to addressing health issues related to emerging technologies require additional research effort and provide early warnings of problems ahead. Primary end users are the general scientific community and academic institutions across Europe. - To provide scientific information that can be used by international and national advisory bodies in producing interpretive and advisory documents. Primary end users are the EC, national government agencies and advisory bodies and manufacturing and service industries. - To further develop EMF exposure measurement and computational techniques and facilitate multidisciplinary collaboration between epidemiologists, biologists and dosimetrists in quantifying EMF emissions and exposures of people. Primary end users are scientific researchers. - To share the results of ongoing epidemiological, medical and biological EMF research including experience with novel biological techniques. Primary end users are scientific researchers. - To share knowledge of methods and tools for assessing public risk perception of emerging EMF technologies. Primary end users are national and local government agencies, advisory bodies, risk assessors and communicators.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM0704    

 There is an active research programme across Europe into the molecular mechanisms and mutations in AML (acute myeloid leukaemia) and MDS (myelodysplastic syndrome) which is focused on high level technologies such as mRNA or miRNA expression profiling, genome-wide epigenetic or genotyping. They are aimed at understanding the molecular basis of these diseases, to develop technologies for improving diagnosis, prognosis and a move towards personalised therapeutic choices. This Action  will establish a wider European network to promote contacts and exchanges of experience and technology among laboratories involved in basic research and diagnostic services and promote the development of new resources and technological tools providing new insights into basic pathogenesis and improve clinical investigations. The European Genomic and Epigenetic Study on MDS and AML (EuGESMA) COST Action  would establish a permanent network among outstanding groups who actively contribute to the understanding and integration of modern genomics technologies with the aim of translating these into a clinical environment. Keywords: acute myeloid leukaemia, myelodysplastic syndrome, translational research, technology integration.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM0801    

 Protozoan parasites play a central role in the field of human and animal health causing devastating diseases such as malaria and sleeping sickness. Given the rapid development of drug resistance in these organisms it is crucial that the development of novel drugs or vaccines is based on a detailed understanding of parasite/host biology and interaction. Programmed cell death (PCD), is a keystone of the life or death decision in cells of multicellular organisms and in their interactions with parasites. Evidence is rapidly growing for an important role of PCD in the life history of a range of protozoans, albeit involving molecular mechanisms and functions that may be unique to these parasites. Several European groups are at the forefront of the rapid growth of research devoted to various aspects of PCD-like processes in a range of protozoan parasites. Networking these teams will create a focus for this work and accelerate the European impetus. Interactions will lead to greater dissemination of information on PCD mechanisms, markers and evolutionary concepts. Therefore they provide the potential to develop new tools and leading to breakthroughs in the processes involved in PCD, and thus to significant progress in the development of novel treatments. Keywords: Parasite life and death decisions, PCD markers, Protozoan parasites, Molecular mechanisms of PCD, Evolution of PCD       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM0802    

 The molecular characterization of the HLA (Human Leucocyte Antigen) polymorphism in human populations represents a crucial step in several disciplines concerned by public health (histocompatibility/transplantation and epidemiology) and also constitutes a main research focus in human molecular evolution (molecular population genetics). While needing similar requirements at the different levels of their analysis (good quality of sampling, high resolution HLA typing, powerful biostatistic analyses adapted to complex HLA data, easy access to specific population databases and understandable computer tools), the investigators working in these different fields are currently limited in their interactions. HLA-NET offers an innovative framework by which those scientists will put their expertise in laboratory work, clinical work, ethical issues, population genetics, biostatistics and/or computer science into contribution to elaborate consensual standards, define common procedures and share high quality data and tools. Highly significant scientific, technological and societal benefits are expected through the Action  with immediate applications in donor-recipient matching, case-control studies and population genetics research. The network will expand and disseminate its results through an electronic platform starting with more than 15 laboratories throughout Europe. The workshops supported by this Action  will permit essential transfers of knowledge and expertise at the European scale and will foster collaboration throughout Europe and beyond. Keywords: HLA, histocompatibility/transplantation, epidemiology, population genetics, European network       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM0803    

 The main objective of the Action  is to promote research on and use of small fish as models for human diseases via the establishment of a communication platform. This COST Action  will coordinate the distribution of these fish models and will disseminate contacts and knowledge to investigate the molecular and genetic basis of the disturbed physiology of these models. The main audience will be the wider biomedical research community and industry for a faster translation of research into medical applications and as in vivo systems for drug development and toxicity testing.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM0804    

 The main objective of the Action  is to gain knowledge on the role of the HOX/TALE homeodomain regulatory network in development and disease through the joint efforts of different laboratories with complementary expertises in approaches, biological processes, animal models and human diseases.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM0805    

 The main objective of this Action  is to foster a multidisciplinary approach to H4R research, and to focus on the current state of play pertaining to the basic understanding and the huge therapeutic potential of this important new drug target.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM0806    

 The main objective of the Action  is to contribute to the discovery of gene networks that are involved in the development of complex genetic diseases in human. The main benefit of establishing SYSGENET will be at the scientific level. SYSGENET will allow researchers in different European countries to devise common research programmes and infrastructures which will give them access to various GRP resources from different European laboratories and to future GRP resources world-wide. The results from these research activities will provide the basis for a better understanding of human diseases and allow the development of new strategies for their prevention and therapy. In addition, SYSGENET will create a data sharing pan-European platform where the results of multiple phenotypic studies can be combined and new associations between phenotypes, gene networks and genotypes can be identified, allowing entering into the new area of systems genetics.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM0901    

 The main objective of the Action  is to facilitate and improve the accuracy of the diagnosis of MPD and related diseases in European countries. Philadelphia-negative myeloproliferative disorders (MPD) and related diseases are chronic blood diseases which had known little improvement in diagnosis and treatment for decades. In 2005 the discovery in Europe of the V617F mutation of JAK2 in MPD has renewed interest in these diseases. Since 2005, other mutations have been discovered in MPD and related diseases. New diagnosis tools will be designed and novel drugs will soon be tested. The objective of this COST Action , which regroups the main leaders in the field of MPD research, diagnosis and patient care, is to establish a European Network of experts in MPD and related diseases, MPD-EuroNet. This Action  will formalize collaboration between European MPD experts in order to facilitate, optimize and standardize diagnosis and care for MPD patients in Europe. The network will centralize the diagnostic investigation of rare forms of MPD and related diseases.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM0902    

 The main objective of the Action  is to bundle research expertise on atopic eczema (AE) and to identify key genetic and environmental risk factors. Atopic eczema (AE) is an inflammatory skin disorder which is characterized by dry and itchy skin and a cutaneous hyperreactivity to environmental triggers. It affects at least 15% of children and 2-10% of adults and often predates the development of allergic airway diseases. Given its substantial prevalence, which has seen an enormous rise especially in industrialized nations, and the lack of cure, there is a pressing need to better understand its pathophysiology. Recent evidence from molecular genetics underscores the importance of the skin barrier genes in addition to genes promoting abnormal immunological pathways. To reveal the mechanisms by which environmental factors pursue the genetic predisposition into disease manifestation, a multi-disciplinary approach is needed with complementary experimental approaches including both in vivo studies and validated animal and in vitro models. This COST Action  will bring together experts fengaged in epidemiology, genetics, clinical research and research on skin barrier and immunology.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM0903    

 The main objective of this Action  is the formation of a scientific network dedicated to a better understanding of the biology of HDL, the identification of targets for novel HDL-based therapies and the discovery of biomarkers which can be used for diagnostics, prevention and monitoring of cardiovascular disease risk. High-density lipoprotein (HDL) is an attractive target for preventing and curing coronary artery disease (CAD) in view of the inverse association between plasma HDL cholesterol and CAD risk as well as the multiple beneficial, anti-atherogenic properties of HDL. As yet, no effective HDL-tailored therapy of CAD is available. This may be due to the fact that HDLs differ in composition and functionality which necessitates the search for the proper biomarkers to assess and monitor HDL-related CAD risk. This COST Action  (acronym: HDLnet) therefore aims to create a scientific network of leading European investigators working on epidemiology, clinical aspects, genetics, structure, function, metabolism and regulation of HDL in order to foster multidisciplinary and collaborative HDL research. The scientific goals of this Action  will be pursued by five working groups. They will obtain, share and discuss novel information on structure, function and regulation of HDL, exchange resources and technology and develop strategies to exploit this knowledge and know-how for diagnostics and therapy of disturbed HDL metabolism and atherosclerosis. The major economic/societal benefits from this Action  will be the reduction of CAD-related morbidity and mortality in Europe and the support of the European biomedical industry and economic competitiveness.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM0904    

 The main objective of this Action  is to create a pan-European interdisciplinary network of scientists with the goal to promote the study of Gilles de la Tourette Syndrome (GTS), improve the standard of care for GTS across Europe, and educate the public and professionals about the disorder. Gilles de la Tourette Syndrome (GTS) is an inherited neuropsychiatric disorder with childhood onset. It is marked by multiple motor and vocal tics and high comorbidity rates with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and obsessive compulsive disorder. Due to lack of education of medical professionals, educators, and the general public, GTS is underdiagnosed and patients are severely discriminated against. Efforts to elucidate the genetic etiology of GTS are fragmented across Europe and hampered by low statistical power. This COST Action  will foster the creation of a pan-European, interdisciplinary scientific network with a goal to promote the study of GTS, improve the standards of care, and educate the public and professionals, combating stigmatisation of affected individuals. Best practice guidelines are going to be set and national projects are going to be unified into a large-scale effort that will uncover the genetic basis of GTS and disentangle the interplay between environment and genetics.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM0905    

 The primary objective of this Action  is the pooling of knowledge and coordination at the European level of research in the field of infectious diseases. The understanding of RNA-mediated regulatory networks in pathogenic bacteria requires concerted studies in different organisms including Archaea and yeast. Data from different organisms should be made available and comparable through the usage of compatible techniques and approaches. Finally, strategies used by pathogens to adapt to their hosts are to be deciphered with the aim to identify novel targets for therapeutic intervention. Bacterial infections continue to be a serious health problem worldwide and research to understand and combat bacterial infections remains indispensibale and needs considerable further efforts. Alternative approaches are needed to address this important concern in novel ways. In the past years, a very high number of regulatory RNAs have been discovered. Many of these control bacterial pathogenicity and the adaptation of bacteria to environmental changes and to their hosts. However, these studies have only been performed in a few model organisms and are still in an initial state. It is now urgent to widen the scope of the present research to include all major human pathogens focusing on common mechanisms between pathogens and identifying pathogen-specific targets. This COST Action  connects European research groups from different disciplines working on regulatory RNAs in a large number of different human pathogens. The aim of this COST Action  is to bring these experts together allowing synergy between the different approaches to a common goal: to increase basic knowledge on the regulation of bacterial pathogenicity on a genomic scale in order to identify novel targets to develop novel therapies. This COST Action  will boost a novel fast expanding research area by especially promoting young investigators.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM0906    

 The main objective of this Action  is to define and characterize the immunotype  of healthy individuals and patients with immune mediated inflammatory diseases before, during, and after targeted immunomodulation. Immune-mediated inflammatory diseases (IMIDs) are characterized by dysregulation of the immune response, leading to chronic disorders that affect organ integrity and function. The burden of disease and socio-economic impact of IMIDs in the Western world are comparable to those for infectious diseases or malignancies. The major challenge in the field of IMIDs is not only to unravel their pathogenesis, but also to translate the newly available therapeutic options into optimal personalized care. One key step is the rational measurement of the functional immune status in individual patients that provides crucial information relating to staging, treatment choice, monitoring of efficacy, safety and dose adjustment of immunomodulation, as well as biological assessment of remission. The knowledge and technology required to define such an immunotype  is currently dispersed within centres with expertise in specific pathways or organ-specific diseases. The ENTIRE- Action  will harness the multidisciplinary synergy between different European centres in the field of immunology to define, validate, and implement a rational and standardized measurement of the immune function for IMIDs and their treatment. Building on the unique European model of structural integration between fundamental and clinical research, the Action  will ultimately promote the translation of new developments into optimal individualized treatment of IMIDs.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM0907    

 The objective of this Action  is to understand the rapidly emerging role of the neural extracellular matrix (ECM) in brain function and dysfunction, by synergising European research in this multidisciplinary domain. The synergy is essential to study complex interaction between ECM, neurons and glial cells, which have historically represented separate fields of science. This Action  will be instrumental to address the following scientific questions: what are the functional properties of different ECM components in the brain, which new research tools are in need to study neural ECM, which ECM molecules are linked to brain disorders, which drugs can target them, and how to synthesize three dimensional ECM scaffolds that would mimic specific forms of neural ECM and guide reconstitution of neural circuits.The future economic/societal benefits from this Action  will be development of novel ECM-based therapeutic strategies for major neurological, neurodegenerative and neuropsychiatric disorders, such as epilepsy, traumatic brain injury, dementia, schizophrenia, and mental retardation.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1001    

 NANONET will establish the first scientific platform to focus and integrate the exciting new knowledge on intermediate filaments with novel developments in cell biology, molecular biology, medicine, (bio)chemistry, engineering, mathematics and physics. This COST Action  will enable the synergistic development of novel collaborative research projects to deliver a multi-disciplinary understanding of cell homeostasis and its vulnerabilities in health and disease. NANONET will elevate and promote awareness of these important nanofilaments, increasing knowledge of their nanomechanical and biological properties from which new therapies and treatments for the health and well-being of the European people will emerge. The COST Action  will capture the commercial applications of this new knowledge and take advantage of current scientific advances in the field.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1002    

 This COST Action  relates to bacterial infections seen in the human hereditary disease Cystic Fibrosis  (CF). This is the most common lethal single gene disorder in Europe and is associated with end organ inflammation and damage particularly affecting the lungs. The bacterial factors and the molecular mechanisms which provoke full blown inflammation in CF are mostly unclear. The COST Action  will investigate the structure, function and immunostimulatory activity of CF pathogens including Gram negative and Gram positive cell wall components. These pathogens particularly Pseudomonas , Acinetobacter  and S.  aureus  are also important causes of hospital acquired infections  affecting many other patient groups thus improving made within this COST Action  may have much wider applicability to include immunosuppressed or hospitalised patients who are also at risk from these bacteria.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1003    

 A wide number of scientific methodologies and disciplines are relevant to the study of early autism, including studying genetically at risk  siblings; the development of novel neuroimaging techniques; and developing and testing screening instruments and interventions. The lack of a forum to enhance the scientific synergies between these strands of basic and applied research has hindered progress. This Action  will create a network to enable developments in clinical practice and policy to be informed by cutting edge science and a rigorous evidence-base, significantly improving quality of life for individuals with autism, their families and broader European society. Increased and earlier recognition has impacted across Europe in terms of demand for diagnostic services and interventions. Current health care systems across Europe are very variable in terms of their expertise and capacity to support families with young children with autism, often leading to marginalisation.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1004    

 The biological and medical importance of the endogenously generated gaseous transmitter nitric oxide was recognized by the 1998 Nobel Prize for Medicine/Physiology. It is now clear that several gasotransmitters  exist and this class of mediators also includes carbon monoxide (CO) and hydrogen sulfide (H 2 S). Several of the groups leading this research field are based in the EU, thus, the formation of a European network that collates scattered knowledge, resources and expertise on gaseous mediators will encourage the dissemination of innovation, boost collaborations and increase the European competitiveness in this field. In the longer term, we anticipate this concerted effort will accelerate translational research in inflammation, cardiovascular disease and CNS disorders, areas in which the biology of these three gaseous molecules has been implicated.  The benefits from the support of such a network are expected in multiple levels: scientific, innovation/technological and societal.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1005    

 Next generation sequencing (NGS) is a highly parallelised approach for quickly and economically sequencing new genomes, re-sequencing large numbers of known genomes, or for rapidly investigating transcriptomes under different conditions. Producing data on an unprecedented scale, these techniques are now driving the generation of knowledge (especially in biomedicine and molecular life sciences) to new dimensions. The massive data volumes being generated by these new technologies require new data handling and storage methods. Hence, the life science community urgently needs new, and improved approaches to facilitate NGS data management and analysis. This COST Action  unites bioinformaticians, computer scientists and biomedical scientists, harnessing their expertise to bring NGS data management and analysis to new levels of efficiency and integration. Rigorous surveillance of NGS technology and NGS-related software developments will allow the partners to generate software solutions for future NGS opportunities in a timely manner. The Action  will increase the ability of European groups to maximally benefit from NGS technology, and will create a nucleus for world-wide activities to jointly address the upcoming biomedical informatics revolution.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1006    

 Mast cells and basophils have long been recognized for their detrimental role in the elicitation of allergic diseases. In recent years, scientific results revealed both cell types as versatile effector cells that exhibit far more complex functions beyond their role in allergy. Mast cells and basophils have been shown to be critically involved in various innate and adaptive immune responses and, thereby, providing beneficial host protecting immunity. In contrast, they also contribute to the development and maintenance of several chronic inflammatory diseases which, even at the present time, lack sufficient treatment options. The diversity of important mast cell and basophil functions places these cell types into promising therapeutic targets. The Action  will create a network of European experts to foster a multidisciplinary approach for the identification, characterisation, and development of such targets and their translation into novel therapeutic strategies.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1007    

 Dystonia syndromes (DS) are the third most common movement disorder, yet they are poorly understood and are underdiagnosed. The causes of these disabling neurological conditions are poorly known and the mechanisms that give rise to the uncontrollable involuntary movements have not been elucidated. Particularly the role played by genetic and environmental factors is unclear. Scientific initiatives are fragmented across Europe and hampered by insufficient dimension. This Action  will foster the creation of an interdisciplinary network of experts to promote genetic studies of DS, develop experimental animal models, standardise and harmonise patient care and educate the public and professionals about the disorder. It will create a unified platform for sharing expertise and exchanging procedures among centres in COST countries. Short-term scientific missions, training schools and workshops will be organised to train early-stage scientists with specific skills in the field of DS. Best practice guidelines will be set and national initiatives will be unified into a large-scale effort to improve knowledge of DS and increase standards of care for patients.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1101    

 Darwinian selection of random mutations is considered the driving force for evolution. However, it is now clear that acquired characters can also be transmitted from one generation to the next through non-Mendelian inheritance, with influence on cell differentiation and occurrence of diseases. Important questions are whether environmental changes can induce such epigenetic variation and if these variations drive adaptation. Research on ciliates has greatly contributed to unraveling the molecular mechanisms of non-Mendelian heredity. These unicellular eukaryotes constitute excellent models to study basic biological processes. We propose the organization of an innovating, highly interacting, dynamic European research network focusing on epigenetics, genome evolution and ecology of ciliates. The aim of this COST Action  is to obtain solid evidence for the role of epigenetic phenomena in environmental adaptation. Participants will be from 9 COST countries, with the possible addition of non-COST countries for mutual benefits. A European network of ciliate molecular biologists will improve the quality of the research and training of young scientists on the continent, and will provide greater visibility for European research. The knowledge expected to be produced through the Action  will likely be of use to other researchers in the fields of genetics, genome evolution, population genetics, environmental sciences, cell differentiation and  health.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1102    

 Dementia is a major clinical challenge with care costs approaching 1% of global GDP. Recent estimates suggest that delaying disease onset by 5 years would halve its prevalence. As new disease-modifying treatments will be specific to causative diseases, expensive and bear significant side effects, early diagnosis of dementia will be essential. Current diagnostic criteria include the use of image-based biomarkers using radiotracers. The AID Action  aims at coordinating the development of an alternative and cost-effective tool based on an MRI technique, Arterial Spin Labelling (ASL), to obtain reproducible brain perfusion measurements in dementia patients by bringing together scientists and clinicians from across Europe through the flexibility of the COST mechanism. The scientific program is centered around four work packages and three workgroups aiming at developing standards, improving the reliability of the technique and as establishing it as a possible clinical trial outcome measure. Development of MRI methods, post-processing tools, protocols of cross-validation, statistical analyses and launch of clinical and comparative studies will be undertaken. The main benefit of this Action  will be to provide a cost-effective alternative to radiotracer-based biomarkers, and help care providers throughout Europe balancing the need for early diagnosis of dementia with the necessary healthcare cost containment.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1103    

 Mass spectrometry imaging is a rapidly developing technique that uses spatially resolved proteomic and metabolomic techniques to simultaneously trace the distributions of hundreds of biomolecules directly from patient tissue samples. Using essentially the same technology peptides, proteins, pharmaceuticals and metabolites can be analyzed, without a label and without prior knowledge. The driving force behind the high and increasing popularity of imaging mass spectrometry is its demonstrated potential for the determination of new diagnostic/prognostic biomarkers, across several chemical domains, including pathologies of overlapping/identical morphology that cannot be distinguished using established histopathological methods. All major mass spectrometry vendors now supply instruments capable of imaging experiments, and imaging mass spectrometry is now being implemented in a number of European clinics and pharmaceutical companies. Investigations utilizing mass spectrometry imaging for healthcare research would benefit enormously from standardized, best practice protocols developed by the integrated application and comparison of the formidable array of approaches already developed within individual European laboratories. The concerted research plan enabled by this Action  will investigate the full potential of integrated mass spectrometry imaging to develop new molecular diagnostic and prognostic tools for a variety of diseases as well as providing new tools aiding pharmaceutical development.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1104    

 The Action  will investigate the neuroendocrine mechanisms that are integrated at the hypothalamic level and regulate the complex organ network controlling reproduction. Implicated genes/pathways have been identified through genetic investigations of rare patients with isolated GnRH deficiency, who display reproductive failure. Despite knowledge of 16 disease genes, multiple additional genes/mechanisms remain undiscovered, requiring higher-order collaborations for full elucidation. Through a collaborative network of physician-scientists and biologists, the Action  will deliver: (i) a database with de-identified genetic and phenotypic data on at least 1,000 GnRH-deficient patients, their families, and unaffected controls; (ii) 1 or more disease gene(s) in each patient, and/or 10 or more novel disease genes; (iii) elucidation of newly identified genes  roles in animal/cell-based systems; and (iv) guidelines for genetic counseling of GnRH-deficient patients based on the emerging disease architecture. Reasons for undertaking the Action  in the COST framework are: (i) a critical yet disjointed mass of experts exists across Europe; (ii) participants are currently nationally funded; (iii) several participants  countries do not participate in the e-RARE2 European funding scheme for rare diseases. European leadership in reproductive research/medicine will be augmented by the Action s anticipated benefits; (i) collaboration among previously competing groups; (ii) shared use of cutting-edge genetic methodologies; and (iii) recruitment/training of young investigators.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1105    

 Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a highly prevalent functional gastrointestinal (GI) disorder with a major impact not only on the healthcare system but also on the patient s quality of life. (Epi-) genetic factors contributing to the pathogenesis of IBS have not further been specified and knowledge is still poor. The search for (epi-) genetic factors in IBS is hampered by the fact that only a few groups worldwide have just recently started to perform genetic analyses in small cohorts. Consequently, contradictory results have been reported due to low statistical power. This COST Action  will foster the establishment of a pan-European, interdisciplinary network with the major goal being the creation of guidelines for patient / control recruitment as well as phenotypic characterization by defining quantitative traits as intermediate phenotypes for the following identification of genetic factors in the pathogenesis of IBS. This Action  will represent a solid basis for novel diagnostic and therapeutic approaches and will significantly improve the insight into IBS pathophysiology, and, hence, help identify new targets for treatment with the ultimate goal of increasing quality of life of affected patients.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1106    

 Chronic lung diseases (CLD) are a major cause of death in the Western world but curative therapies do not exist. Recent studies indicate that the risk to develop CLD is modified by early exposures during critical developmental windows. This concept opens unique opportunities for the pre- or early postnatal modification of later disease risks, but the underlying molecular mechanisms are largely unexplored. To close this gap, a highly cross-disciplinary approach involving scientists from basic and clinical research is required. Several European institutions study early origins of CLD with adequate national funding, but these efforts are not integrated and lack a comprehensive platform for synergistic collaboration. This COST Action  will allow the creation of a coordinated and highly translational research program. This will bring forward a novel understanding of CLD pathogenesis and build the prerequisites for the successful development of early interventions and/or innovative therapies.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1201    

 Microvesicles and Exosomes  (ME)  have attracted much recent interest because of their potential functions, use as disease biomarkers and possible therapeutic exploitation. Due to their enormous relevance, through nationally-funded projects throughout Europe, this relatively new field of research is quickly expanding. There are, however, many associated issues that need to be addressed to ensure optimal research performance and collation and cross-interpretation of data. These issues range from the need to derive a consensus on fundamental guidelines/nomenclature and optimal techniques for vesicle isolation and analysis, to more advanced issues such as collating emerging data and expertise towards better understanding, and thus exploiting, the physiological and pathological roles of ME. There is also urgency to identify gaps in ME knowledge and how best collaborative research can address these questions. This COST Action  will, therefore, create a network of European experts, fostering a multidisciplinary approach to enhance both basic understanding and translational potential of ME. To achieve this, this Action  will bring together a critical, yet currently fragmented, mass of academic, clinical and industry expertise from COST and non-COST countries in a field where Europe plays a leadership role, while developing a forum for free-exchange of concepts and training of young European researchers.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1202    

 Life requires oxygen. This runs the risk that, when oxygen leaks out from normal metabolism, reactive oxygen species (ROS) are formed, which - when too high - trigger disease. With the idea to overcome this, antioxidants are heavily marketed, yet without proof of their effectiveness. Rather, worrying evidence suggests adverse effects. This paradox is due to the fact that ROS are not only bad , but - in tightly regulated amounts - also act as essential signalling molecules. Unravelling the fine balance between ROS acting as a friend or a foe is fundamental to understand aerobic life. To advance this important area of biology and medicine, highly synergistic approaches combining diverse and scattered disciplines are needed. For this, COST provides an ideal framework. EU-ROS will bring together multi-disciplinary experts to enhance the competitiveness of European research. By applying fundamentally new approaches it will generate advanced knowledge and translate this into novel applications ranging from medicine to crop science. With its dynamic structure, EU-ROS will attract further experts and particularly support capacity building of the future European research leaders and talented women. Collectively, EU-ROS will overcome the fragmentation of European R D on oxygen/ROS research while its translational components will contribute to European societies  economic growth and wellbeing.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1203    

 The application of the rapidly evolving -omics technologies to cancer research is a reality and it has demonstrated that large-scale international collaboration is essential to decipher relevant information in the context of massive-scale interrogations. This is even more important for rare and dreadful diseases like pancreas cancer (PDAC). We propose the creation of a unique European platform to facilitate the collaboration of a broad range of European and international PDAC multidisciplinary research groups to integrate knowledge and experience in a multidisciplinary way from cell to society ; promote the application of uniform study tools and protocols; foster their optimal use by early-stage researchers; enhance the mobility and training of researchers; and permeate the society with the results originated by the Action . This Action  will develop novel interdisciplinary tools that will improve our understanding of PDAC and its control by answering questions related to the aetiology, early detection and evidence-based and personalized treatment to enhance primary, secondary, an tertiary prevention, respectively, as well as on health management. The Action  brings together a group of young scholars across a range of disciplines in collaboration with more experienced researchers and will allow Europe to actively participate in the international scenario of pancreas cancer research.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1204    

 The Action  will provide an interdisciplinary framework to enhance interaction activities within the field of optical biosensing, between world-class  academic groups, labs and system integrators from industry. It will exploit novel laser sources and innovative feedback interferometry in specific biomedical applications. Recent developments in the design of solid-state laser sources at near-infrared, mid-infrared and terahertz frequencies, coupled with novel self-mixing approaches to signal detection and the integration of these into imaging platforms, provide a way forward in the design of the next generation of detection systems. Specifically, we propose extending the noninvasive interrogation of skin tissue into these frequencies. The Action  will exchange knowledge, explore and compare technology platforms and perform clinical validation and evaluation of new devices which will permit detection of both the changes in skin lesions and disordered blood flow patterns and tissue perfusion typical of malignancy. The COST scheme is an ultimate choice for this network as it will bring together COST- countries academia, industry and clinical end-users which would be virtually impossible through any other European funding mechanism.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1205    

 Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most frequent neoplasms worldwide and an important cause of morbidity in the developed world. It is necessary to identify individuals with a medium-high CRC risk in order to develop adequate preventive measures. The identification of inherited genetic factors involved in CRC susceptibility can help to profile individual disease risk and may enable early screening and treatment monitoring. Participants interested in networking in this Action  include 19 research groups actively working on CRC genetics with high success and with access to more 50,000 CRC cases and 50,000 controls through cohorts in 11 countries. This Action  will permit to articulate the cooperation between these research groups in Europe in order to comprehensively understand the impact of inherited susceptibility to CRC and to describe the genetic landscape of this disease, providing a highly innovative and unconditional tool for personalized CRC medicine with a future application in early screening and treatment monitoring for this disease.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1206    

 This COST Action  aims to advance the development of antisense-mediated exon skipping for rare diseases, focusing on Duchenne muscular dystrophy for which this approach is currently assessed in phase 3 clinical trials. Several challenges hamper its development to wide clinical application: 1) There is no standardized protocol for important biological outcome measures, such as dystrophin restoration. 2) The approach is mutation specific; development for patient subgroups is challenging as most mutations are rare. 3) Fragmentation: several European groups work on preclinical optimization. 4) There is therapeutic misconception amongst patients and unrealistic expectations. This COST Action  will address the described issues through 1) meetings and training to standardize outcome measures, 2) meetings with regulatory authorities to discuss alternatives to develop this approach for small patients groups, 3) networking workshops where unpublished data are shared confidentially between Parties to foster synergistic work and avoid duplication, 4) training of young scientists in unbiased and clear communication to patients. Networking is crucial for research in the orphan disease field and this model is applicable to other rare diseases for which exon skipping is currently in preclinical development. Groups involved are anticipated to join the Action  when their research moves towards the clinical trial phase.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1207    

 Imprinting disorders (IDs) are a group of rare congenital diseases affecting growth, development and metabolism with a lifelong impact on patients' quality of life. Despite their common underlying (epi)genetic aetiologies, IDs are usually studied separately by small groups working in isolation, and the basic pathogenesis and long term clinical consequences of IDs remain largely unknown. Efforts to elucidate the aetiology of IDs are currently fragmented across Europe and standardisation of diagnostic and clinical management is lacking. This Action  will, for the first time, draw together researchers of all eight known human IDs in an interdisciplinary pan- European Network for Human Congenital IDs , working to advance understanding of the pathophysiology with the major aim of translating this knowledge to improvement of diagnostic and clinical management for the benefit of the patients and their families. The Action  will harmonise a common ID classification system, develop guidelines for treatment through consensus, create standard operation procedures (SOPs) for diagnosis based on best current practice, coordinate databases held in different countries to make them compatible and useful as a springboard for collective research initiatives, identify new imprinting disorders through collaborative effort, educate researchers and stimulate translational exchange. The ID network will join forces and complement studies to reduce health care costs and increase the life quality of patients.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1208    

 Urinary incontinence is a major health burden. For many patients stress urinary incontinence is associated with progressive degeneration of the muscular tissue. During this process muscle cells die. Novel cell- based therapy for regeneration and improvement of the sphincter muscle can tackle the etiology of incontinence rather than the consequences. Unfortunately, different laboratories use different cell-based sphincter approaches. This COST Action , Re generative S phincter T herapy ( ReST ), will endorse a strong interdisciplinary collaboration in academic, clinical, and medical technology. The major aim of this COST Action  is to assemble an International Board of Experts in order to harmonize cell-based patient therapy methods that would lead to a global multi-centre study for approval by the European Medicines Agency (EMA). COST will allow us to interact with other networks across various disciplines to promote pan-European teaching and investigation. COST will contribute not only to the quality of life of patients affected, but in the long run will serve to control high costs caused by incontinence by providing knowledge on efficacy and information on effective methods of application of the various regenerative sphincter therapies.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1209    

 Aldosterone is the major hormone regulating blood pressure. Alterations in blood levels of aldosterone and genetic mutations in its receptor MR are major causes of hypertension. Many of the drugs in clinical use and in development target aldosterone and MR actions and are an intense area of research in Europe.  The major reasons for launching this Action  are to 1) defragment and enhance the excellence of the European research in the field 2)  network leading European laboratories in aldosterone and MR research through training workshops/conferences, short to medium term study missions for early stage researchers leading to joint publications and grant proposals 3)  identify new signaling pathways of aldosterone/MR to uncover new therapeutic targets 4)  rapidly identify novel clinical outcomes of MR antagonists 5) develop new biomarkers of aldosterone/MR activation to better identify patients suited for such therapy 6)  stimulate and support pharmaceutical companies and SMEs to develop diagnostic tools and drugs. The ADMIRE COST Action  will harness a European network of experienced researchers benefiting from funded national research programmes.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1301    

 Corneal blindness is a worldwide problem and can be treated by transplantation of donor human tissue, or by implantation of artificial, non-biological corneas. However, there is a great lack of donors worldwide and current implants are either expensive or do not integrate well. The solution may be found in the development of biodegradable artificial corneas, consisting of bio-matrices seeded with host limbal stem cells. However, current emerging research is in its early stages and fragmented among research institutes throughout Europe. This COST Action  combines scientific, clinical and industrial knowledge in the field of corneal regeneration. This will link researchers in the fields of biomaterial research, stem cell manipulation, tissue engineering, ophthalmology and immunology. This planned collaboration will, not only result in a unique European knowledge base to boost the development of biodegradable artificial corneas from basic research to clinical application, but will also provide the foundation to foster the development of a new generation of cornea specialists that are interested in regenerative medicine, especially in ophthalmology. In regard of the aging population of Europe, such a focus is of great importance to help our increasing population of elderly individuals with corneal disease.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1302    

 Differences or Disorders of Sex Development (DSD) constitute a complex group of rare diseases that are caused by chromosomal, genetic and endocrine metabolic disturbances that affect the endocrine-reproductive system, thereby modulating the sexual phenotype of a given person. DSD poses great challenges for our understanding of sex and gender development in biology, medicine and societal issues. Enormous scientific advances are possible through modern genetic techniques in conjunction with thorough clinical and laboratory assessment. This COST Action  will link leading international scientists, clinicians, and stakeholders in the field to characterise DSD with the aim of a diagnosis to all people with DSD with structured, potentially personalised, management and therapies. The Action  will aid to the understanding of the clinical heterogeneity as well as reveal the pathophysiological commonalities between different forms of DSD at the molecular level. It will additionally benefit the science in rare diseases of the international community and also the formation of a European Reference Network. Since DSD is an umbrella term for a number of conditions most of which imply more than purely medical or scientific expertise, the Action  will pay due attention to the larger societal implications of DSD research.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1303    

 Neuromuscular diseases (NMD) form a large group of individually rare diseases that are present in all populations and affect people of all ages. Many of them result in chronic disability, posing a significant healthcare burden for society. Diagnosis and therapy development for NMD has rapidly expanded in recent years and there is an urgent need to develop objective, non-invasive outcome measures to monitor disease progression and treatment effect. The use of novel magnetic resonance imaging and spectroscopy techniques (MRI and MRS) applied to NMD is showing increasing promise in this regard, but progress has been hindered by the rarity of the conditions and lack of options for pooling data from different groups. This COST Action  will overcome the main hurdles to rollout of MR techniques by sharing expertise and data, validating protocols across platforms and exploring the potential of MRI and MRS as a helpful diagnostic tool and a quantitative outcome measure in NMD clinical trials. The objectives of standardizing applications of MRI and MRS in NMD, training of early stage researchers and the development of an online atlas of neuromuscular imaging will enhance knowledge of scientists and healthcare professionals and ultimately benefit patients with NMD.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1304    

 The number of patients with autoimmune diseases and recipients of organ or stem-cell transplants is increasing worldwide. Currently, these patients require lifelong administration of immunosuppressive drugs. Often, these drugs are ineffective, expensive and show severe side-effects. More effective and safer therapies aimed at modifying unwanted immune responses permanently or for prolonged periods are needed. Accumulating knowledge on mechanisms of immune tolerance has led to development of specific Cell-based Tolerance-inducing Therapies (CTT) with the specific objectives to restrain unwanted immune reactions long-term. For patients, personalised CTT will represent a breakthrough for healthcare and quality of life. Clinical CTT studies are underway or starting in single European institutes. The used CTT products are diverse and the efficacy of therapy is monitored by different parameters. This creates the risk of redundancy in trials and suboptimal performance indicators for comparison of trial outcomes. The main objective of this Action  is to initiate a network that will coordinate European CTT efforts to minimise overlap and maximise comparison of the diverse approaches through establishment of consensus monitoring parameters. The A FACTT- Action  will thus focus and accelerate the CTT field and ensure that the field will progress in an efficient, safe and cost-effective way.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1305    

 Tinnitus is the perception of sound in the absence of an environmental acoustic stimulus. In Europe over 70 million people experience tinnitus and for 7 million it creates a debilitating condition. There are no established treatment approaches available for curing tinnitus. Better treatment is urgently needed. Brain research has created a paradigm shift by demonstrating that tinnitus is the consequence of altered neural activity in specific brain networks rather than an ear problem. Based on the understanding of tinnitus as brain disorder, first promising therapeutic approaches have already been developed by individual groups participating in this Action . However further development is hampered by the heterogeneity of tinnitus and limited knowledge about the neuronal underpinnings of the different tinnitus subtypes. This Action  will foster the establishment of a pan-european multidisciplinary network with the major goal to facilitate (1) the identification of meaningful criteria for tinnitus subtyping, (2) the neurobiological underpinnings of the different tinnitus subtypes and (3) their relevance for response to treatment.  This knowledge is essential for developing of new treatment approaches, their clinical investigation and the speed of translation into marketable products. This Action  intends a stepwise approach which involves identification of (1) meaningful clinical and demographic characteristics for tinnitus subtyping, (2) tinnitus related changes of brain activity in the different forms of tinnitus, (3) intermediate genetic phenotypes for the identification of genetic factors in the pathogenesis of tinnitus and (4) predictors for response to various treatments. This approach requires a coordinated effort from basic scientists, technicians and clinicians of different disciplines working together in ongoing close collaboration.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1306    

 Intracellular proteolysis is critical for cell homeostasis and to prevent pathologies such as cancers, immune diseases and neurological disorders. Its involvement in the control of almost every biological process has generated a huge interest amongst scientists from very diverse backgrounds, which in turn has resulted into both a tremendous advance of our knowledge and an important fragmentation of the field. The Action  will coordinate and integrate the efforts made by European research teams to better understand intracellular proteolysis and to translate novel discoveries into products of clinical and/or economical values. It will gather all European academic, clinical and industrial partners willing to foster collaboration and training in the field through the organization of meetings, workshops and exchange programs. The implementation of different translational projects within the network will generate a mind-agitating  atmosphere that will promote both creativity and reactivity. To help overcome the energy-barrier that too often limits development of novel and original ideas and concepts, a core dedicated think-tank created within PROTEOSTASIS will detect outstanding and clinically relevant projects that cannot be productively tackled by individual teams and help to assemble both the appropriate funding and workforce required to translate them into medically-valuable applications.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1307    

 The translation of novel discoveries from basic research to clinical application is a long, often inefficient and costly process. Consequently, Translational Medicine  has become a top priority. Appropriate animal models are critical for the success of translational research. The choice of species will always depend on the specific problem that a research study aims to address. Although rodent models are widely used, they often fail to provide an accurate representation of the human disease. Thus, there is an urgent need for non-rodent animal models that mimic aspects of human anatomy and physiology more closely. Pigs, small ruminants and rabbits are excellent candidates. This Action  will (i) share information and technology for the development of tailored large animal models; (ii) develop criteria for selection of the species most suitable as a model for the question under investigation; (iii) establish and validate standardized phenotyping protocols; (iv) create a database of existing models, tissue samples, and validated phenotypic assays; and (v) develop and communicate concepts for the scientific and ethical evaluation of experiments with large animals, including involvement of the regulatory authorities. In fostering translational research in Europe the Action  supports the objectives of the Amsterdam Treaty.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1308    

 The Action  will provide a cooperative framework to support the research on beneficial biological effects of non-ionizing electromagnetic fields (EMFs) and their use in biomedical applications. Research on biological effects of EMFs has traditionally focused on health risks. Inspired by promising recent studies on useful biomedical EMF interactions and applications, this Action  will focus on beneficial effects, aiming for breakthrough results, new discoveries and innovative biomedical technologies. The Action  will provide a better understanding of underlying physical and biological interaction mechanisms, related to both cancer and non-cancer applications, filling the gaps in the present state of knowledge. Ultimately, the Action  will aim to contribute to development and optimization of innovative EMF-based medical devices and procedures, which will be safer, more efficient and less invasive. Interdisciplinarity of the proposed topic and significance of the expected outcomes require a concerted research network at the European level.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1309    

 The aim of the Action  is to develop a collaborative network of top European experts working towards the progress of the emerging field of Raman-based applications for clinical diagnostics. The Action  coordinates research run by diverse yet complementary research groups in Europe on novel, label-free and rapid technologies based on a wide variety of Raman spectroscopies for the clinical diagnostics of body fluids, bacteria, cells and tissues. International interdisciplinary networking opportunities are offered between scientists within biophotonics, chemometricians and physicians/clinicians. Main goal of the network is to give a major impetus in this vibrant field of research by aligning it to clinical requirements and application aspects (the unmet medical need) by means of COST as the best mechanism to progress the state-of-the-art. The Action  will create a platform for scientific communication, exchange, collaboration and for new research activities, combining the partners  expertise in technology, component, system and methodology development and medical application. As a result, novel technology portfolios for clinical diagnostics will emerge to the benefit of patients as well as to the economy. The interest of the next generation of promising scientists will be attracted, thereby ensuring that Europe will remain at the frontline of research into clinical diagnostics.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1401    

 The number of people over 65 is predicted to double in the next 50 years. Age is the most important risk factor for stroke, heart attacks, cancers, diabetes, and many other chronic diseases. Tackling the effects of the ageing population in Europe has stimulated funding of research initiatives at both national and European levels. A key requisite to develop new interventions for age-related conditions and promote healthier ageing is the availability and use of preclinical murine models. There is currently a clear lack of such models and appropriate standardised methodologies to test interventions. Therefore, to improve the quality of European ageing research a coordinated interdisciplinary action is needed to standardise methodologies and animal welfare, and to define endpoints, as well as centralising information, models and technologies for the assessment of interventions. This Action  proposes  to set-up a highly interactive and flexible European network, which will create a critical mass of cross-disciplinary scientists, clinicians and industrial partners to reach consensus on ways to test preclinical interventions in ageing mice. It will consolidate current best practice across leading European institutions and researchers, maximise resource efficiency, and provide a platform to help train the next generation of scientists.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1402    

 The aim of this Action  is to nucleate a group of researchers with a common interest, namely developing and applying new biomolecular mass spectrometry (MS) methods in order to make the characterisation of protein structure and dynamcis more rapid and routine. Methods include non-denaturing MS approaches in combination with ion mobility, as well as hydrogen-deuterium exchange, chemical crosslinking and other labeling techniques together with computational approaches. This toolbox will be made available to the broader scientific community, and will greatly enhance our ability to design new drugs and ensure the quality and efficacy of biopharmaceuticals, thereby benefiting human health.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1403    

 In cancer, infection and inflammation, the immune system s function can be dysregulated, contributing to disease pathology. As part of this process, instead of fighting disease, immune cells may suppress beneficial immune responses and increase pathology. Despite their pathophysiological importance, the identity and biology of the so called myeloid regulatory cells (MRCs) is poorly understood. Depending on the MRC subtype and the respective disease, conflicting results have been published. This Action  will form a network of researchers and clinicians which aims to establish a gold standard of common protocols and harmonizing guidelines for the analysis and clinical monitoring of MRCs. There is also a deficit in the translation of findings from animal models to humans, and Mye-EUNITER will build an analytical mouse-monkey-man correlation line. Standardized and validated tools for MRC analysis will aid the development of cellular biomarkers of disease and guide the design of novel therapies to manipulate the functions of MRCs.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1404    

 Non-globular proteins (NGPs) encompass different molecular phenomena that defy the traditional sequence-structure-function paradigm. NGPs include intrinsically disordered regions, tandem repeats, aggregating domains, low-complexity sequences and transmembrane domains. Although growing evidence suggests that NGPs are central to many human diseases, functional annotation is very limited. It was recently estimated that close to 40% of all residues in the human proteome lack functional annotation and many of these are NGPs. While a better understanding of NGPs is crucial to fully comprehend human molecular physiopathology, progress has been hampered so far by the lack of a systematic approach to their study. This Action  Proposal aims to create a pan-European scientific network of groups that work on NGPs to strengthen, focus and coordinate research in this field. It proposes to develop a novel classification of NGPs by consensus among interested experts that will be showcased on a newly developed web site, along with meetings, training schools and scientific missions on NGP-related topics.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1405    

 The function of ion channels in immune cells is an emerging field of great basic science and clinical interest because they provide powerful molecular targets to modulate immune cell function. The Ionchan-Immunrespon  network is a novel and exciting enterprise that involves internationally recognised scientists across 15 European countries. The specific aims are i) to develop a strong European workforce to understand the role of ion channels in immune cells, and how deregulation of their function can cause disease, ii) to identify new targets for therapeutic immuno-interventions through modulation of ion channels. Our unique combination of biophysical approaches combined with molecular biology, cell biology and immunology provides a powerful approach for dissecting the functional cell biology of the immune system. The Action  therefore will strengthen academic research in Immunology within Europe and foster closer collaborations with drug and diagnostics development programs in industry.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1406    

 Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is a rare genetic disease affecting approximately 1:10,000. Cilia that line the respiratory tract are dysfunctional and cannot clear mucus properly leading to progressive upper and lower airway disease, including bronchiectasis, hearing impairment and chronic sinusitis. Cilia are common structures throughout the body, so PCD may affect other organs, for example leading to situs inversus, congenital heart defects or infertility. Mutations in 30 different genes have been identified to date, accounting for approximately 60% of PCD.  The clinical picture is very heterogeneous, and as for other rare diseases data on the natural course, phenotypic variability, associations with genotype, and effectiveness of treatments of PCD are scarce. Strategies to manage PCD are derived from other diseases, and are controversial.  Scientists, clinicians, allied health professionals and patient representatives unite in this Action , providing a platform for communication and exchange. The Action  will facilitate PCD-related research to identify mechanisms, study disease patterns and progression, define outcome measures, improve clinical management and identify high priority therapies. This Action  is a platform for preclinical studies that will lead to clinical trials.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1407    

 The main objective of this Action  is to promote the use of C. elegans for basic 'blue-skies' research and as a model for human disease, drug development and pre-clinical trials, through the establishment of a network of young C. elegans  researchers acting as leading scientists and the creation of a centralised communications platform across Europe. The nematode C. elegans has been instrumental in the discovery of conserved principles of fundamental biological processes, leading to novel therapies for a broad range of human diseases. During the last decade, Europe has seen a dramatic increase in the number of laboratories  using  this  model (80 new groups in 18 COST countries) but the community remains fragmented. This COST network is established to build capacity by uniting young European researchers working across three key fields essential to human health: organismal development, neurobiology and lifespan. GENiE ( G roup of C . e legans  N ew I nvestigators in E urope) will enhance and speed up state-of-the art European research by promoting interactions and collaborations across Europe, and competitivity with US labs. GENiE will position Europe at the centre of a scientific excellence network dedicated to the discovery of biological principles, the basis of therapeutic treatments of the future.       Biomedicine and Molecular Biosciences COST Action BM1408    

 The ability to understand, manipulate and control chemical reactions at the molecular level is one of the great challenges of modern research. Since chemical processes are dominant in most areas of science and technology, the ability to control their pathways provides exciting new opportunities that may be exploited by both the research and technological communities. Such "single molecule engineering" requires selective bond cleavage in target molecules to allow subsequent management of the local site chemistry. In electron beam experiments it is well established that low energy electrons offer this selectivity with high efficiency, a selectivity that is controllable by simply "tuning" the electron energy.Recently, low energy electrons derived from the tip of a scanning tunnelling microscope have also been used to control bond rupture and subsequent linkage of individual molecules to the substrate. This Action  aims at an interdisciplinary European programme to combine state-of-the-art in electron induced chemistry and surface science with these recent advances in scanning tunnel microscopy to pioneer a new field of "Electron Controlled Chemical Lithography", with the prospect of designer synthesis down to the nanoscale and electron controlled manipulation of surface properties with spatial resolution ranging from the millimetre down to the nanometre scale. Keywords : Electron controlled chemistry, molecular engineering, low energy electron interactions, scanning tunnel microscopy, inelastic electron tunnelling spectroscopy.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM0601    

 Excessive or insufficient angiogenesis (new blood vessel formation) is connected with many human diseases, cancer included. For effective disease intervention, interdisciplinary approach in the research is necessary. This COST Action  focuses on networking of interdisciplinary oriented chemistry and biology researchers who are actively involved in rationale designing and development of small organic compounds with anti-angiogenic properties. Exchanges of information and presentations of experiences and skills from chemical and biological research will be performed for effective introduction, exploitation and improvement of modern methods for development of new angiogenic inhibitors. Meetings, short-term scientific missions, workshops, training schools and conference will ensure the expansion of effective cooperation in the development of new drug candidates. Keywords : Inhibition of neovascularisation; lead compounds and drug design; treatment of cancer and other diseases; in silico predictions; multivalency in organic synthesis and biology       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM0602    

 The main objective of the Action  is to promote a chemical biology approach for the investigation of free radical pathways. Chemical reactivity and molecular libraries are the start of a multidisciplinary research context from small molecules to large systems, culminating in the biological complexity. The Action  aims at improving communication and exchange among neighbouring scientific fields, such as chemistry with several domains of life sciences, specifically addressing the real barrier consisting of specialist language and tools. Four working groups address the formation, reactivity and fate of free radicals involving bio-molecules, such as unsaturated lipids, aromatic-, cyclic- and sulphur-containing amino acid residues, sugar and base moieties of nucleic acids. Tasks concern the role of free radicals in normal cell metabolism and in damages, defining structural and functional modifications, in the framework of physiologically and pathologically related processes relevant to human quality of life and health. The Action  also promotes the training of young researchers in multi-faceted research tasks. The Action  is expected to involve research groups with funds amounting approximately to 31 million EUR. Keywords:  Radical-based biological processes and mechanisms, biomarkers, radical functioning and damage, modification of unsaturated lipids, degradation or modification of peptides/proteins and nucleosides/DNA.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM0603    

 The main objective of the Action  is to increase the innovative potential of biocatalysis by promoting the multistep catalytic concept, thus bringing this methodology closer to the application sphere. The integration of biocatalysis into chemical processes is one of the three pillars (the Industrial Biotechnology pillar) of the European Platform on Sustainable Chemistry. This methodology also belongs to the fundamental strategies of Green Chemistry. Therefore, this COST Action  (acronym "CASCAT") aims to enhance the synthetic potential of biocatalysis by coupling biotransformations one to another and integrating them with chemical steps to increase the product purity and yields close to quantitative values. A multidisciplinary approach is required to achieve this goal, involving precursor synthesis, enzyme screening, heterologous protein expression, enzyme mutagenesis, biocatalyst (co)-immobilization, bioreactor design and chiral product analysis. CASCAT will consist of four Working Groups applying the multi-step approach to the synthesis/modification and transfer of glycosyl donors/acceptors, the deracemization of amino acids by multiple hydrolase systems, the synthesis of valuable amides and carboxylic acids from cheap chemicals (e.g. aldehydes) via combined action of enzymes involved in nitrile metabolism and entry or follow-up (chemo)enzymatic steps, the development of novel paths to biologically relevant chiral compounds using multienzyme-carboligation reactions or in situ cofactor regeneration. This research will focus on the production of bioactive target molecules (e.g., non-natural amino-acids, glycoconjugates and mimetics, flavonoids, steroids) and chiral precursors of enantiopure pharmaceuticals. Keywords: Cascade reactions, Multistep enzymatic transformations, Biocatalysis, Industrial Biotechnology, Sustainable Chemistry.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM0701    

 The main objective of the Action  is to establish an interdisciplinary European programme to develop new computational tools and to combine them with state-of-the-art quantum-chemistry methods to investigate the new chemistry that arises when molecules and, in particular, chemical reactions are exposed to ultrashort xuv and x-ray laser pulses. The advent of xuv and x-ray ultrashort pulses produced by free-electron lasers and high harmonic generation has opened up the way to a new chemistry at the femto and attosecond time scales. Processes such as ionisation and dissociation can now be monitored in real time, which can be used to develop novel control strategies of chemical reactions. Nevertheless, experiments in this field are difficult to interpret due to the many electronic and nuclear degrees of freedom involved. The implementation of nearly exact theoretical methods in supercomputers has made it possible to guide experimental research for simple molecules. Such methods lie outside the traditional quantum chemistry realm since, e.g., they must accurately reproduce the time evolution of the electronic and nuclear motion, including both excited and continuum states. Therefore, the necessary extension to complex systems, like many-electron atoms, molecules and nanoparticles, requires the joint efforts of the leading European groups included in this Action . Keywords: Chemistry with free-electron lasers and high-order harmonic generation, femtosecond and attosecond chemistry, time-dependent computational methods, control of chemical reactions, ionization and dissociation of molecules, clusters and nano-objects.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM0702    

 The main objective of the Action  is to investigate autocatalytic reaction sytems within supramolecular, prebiotic, and other fields of chemistry and to develop methods for their integration into dynamic supersystems. Systems chemistry is the joint effort of prebiotic and supramolecular chemistry assisted by computer science from theoretical chemistry, biology, and complex systems research to tackle dynamic supersystem integration including at least one autocatalytic subsystem. It is the bottom-up pendant of systems biology towards synthetic biology. The origin of life is seen as a major stimulus to organize research but the field is open for chemistries of limited prebiotic plausibility. Subsystems may be classified as genetic, metabolic, or compartiment-building. Pairwise integration into higher organized supersystems is expected to yield the knowledge enabling later the triple integration into minimal chemical cells. The integration approach will necessarily link to the question of asymmetric autocatalysis and chiral symmetry breaking, while the key challenge is to find the roots of Darwinian evolvability in chemical systems. 5 workgroups will define a trigonal bipyramid, where the axis  theory to asymmetry is surrounded by 3 areas of integration. Keywords: Autocatalysis, self-replication, self-reproduction, supramolecular chemistry, prebiotic chemistry       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM0703    

 The Action  will pave the way for the development of novel drugs to treat neglected diseases such as African sleeping sickness, Chagas disease and Leishmaniasis. Related approaches of molecular genetics, biochemistry, medicinal chemistry, crystallography and bioinformatics will be coordinated and complemented with industrial experience. Established genomes are used to identify drug targets essential to the parasites but absent or different in the host, since inhibitors thereof hold promise as safe and efficacious therapeutics. Validated drug targets will serve as tools in drug discovery processes using complementary strategies: i) high-throughput screening of natural product and other compound libraries and ii) in silico screening of virtual libraries to identify novel leads; iii) chemical synthesis and optimization of identified leads; and iv) structure-based inhibitor design based on established structures or molecular models. The potential therapeutic profile of novel compounds active in vitro will be worked out by techniques of high prognostic value in respect to drug safety. The most promising compounds will be tested in established infection models for all the diseases to choose the most attractive candidates for preclinical and clinical development. The Action  members will cover all expertises required for the multidisciplinary early drug discovery phase. Keywords: Drug discovery, medicinal chemistry, African sleeping sickness, Chagas disease, Leishmaniasis       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM0801    

 The European Phosphorus Sciences Network (PhoSciNet): A Knowledge Platform for Advanced Applications The objective of this COST Action  is to provide a knowledge platform to advance applications in materials science, catalysis, and bioscience-related fields by embedding the advantageous properties of (organo)phosphorus components. Especially important classes of phosphorus-based compounds to be investigated are polymers, organometallic heterocycles, precursors for nanomaterials, chemically robust P-C cages, novel low-cost catalyst ligands, and designed (organo)phosphorus reagents. Within the Action , a European Sciences Network (PhoSciNet) will be established to bring together researchers from European countries, candidate countries, and transformation states for the exchange of knowledge and techniques in these modern, rapidly evolving fields in which building-block methodologies and structure-reactivity correlations are key components. This will be accomplished by annual European Phosphorus Workshops (EuroPhos), intensive exchanges of young researchers, and an internet platform for monitoring and streamlining of innovations in the phosphorus sciences. Industrial partners will be involved in PhoSciNet to ensure rapid and effective technology transfer. The network will facilitate Europe's continued global leadership in the increasingly fierce competition with Asian, American, and other non-European activities in the many new strategic areas related to phosphorus chemistry such as the developing of novel phosphorus-embedded materials, catalysts, and bioorganic compounds. Keywords: phosphorus science, materials science, asymmetric catalysis, nanomaterials, green chemistry       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM0802    

 The main objective of the Action  is to develop peptidomimetic foldamers into a technology platform in drug discovery and biomedical applications. The goal is to relay the ideas, pharmacophore models and requirements among the potential biomedical applications (e.g., inhibition of protein-protein interactions, self-assembling nanostructured drug delivery systems, functional biomimetic materials, etc.), to the laboratories involved in foldamer design and synthesis, and the researchers who are continuously extending the pool of homologated amino acidss. This parallel top-down and bottom-up information handling is expected to boost the application oriented foldamer research in Europe.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM0803    

 The main objective of the Action  is to advance the use of natural products as tools for chemical biology. Applying modern techniques and advancing them, natural products will prove to be instrumental in discovering target proteins and biological pathways that are of relevance to diseases. This in turn, should facilitate and speed up subsequent drug discovery efforts in the pharmaceutical industry.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM0804    

 The main objective of this Action  is to study chemical processes relevant to the physical conditions encountered in the interstellar medium, and on the surface and in the atmospheres of planetary bodies. The Action  aims to provide new insights into the dynamics of the chemical reactions leading to molecular synthesis under such conditions and reveal how these are influenced by the ambient temperature and pressure. Special attention will also be given to the study of the novel surface chemistry prevalent on interstellar medium dust grains and planetary surfaces. The Action  also aims to combine such laboratory data with complementary chemical models to allow a fuller interpretation of observational data.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM0805    

 The main objective of the Action  is to develop cleaner and more efficient combustion processes through the design and implementation of better defined and more accurate detailed chemical kinetic models. The key objective of this Action  is to promote at EU level the development of cleaner and more efficient combustion technologies through the implementation of theoretically grounded and more accurate chemical models. This will be achieved by gathering experts from 21 European countries and working on the theory and computation of elementary reactions, on detailed kinetic modelling in a variety of combustion environments, on experimental measurements in reactors, rapid compression machines, shock tubes and burners and on the assemblage, as well, of technologically advanced industrial devices. This is motivated by the fact that the current models which have been developed for the combustion of hydrocarbons and oxygenated compounds present in natural gas, kerosene, gasoline, diesel and bio-fuels do a reasonable job in predicting auto-ignition and flame propagation parameters, and the formation of the main regulated pollutants. However their success rate deteriorates sharply in the prediction of the formation of minor products (alkenes, dienes, aromatics, aldehydes) and soot nano-particles, which have a deleterious impact on both the environment and on human health. The launch of this Action  would represent, therefore a big step forward in our understanding of this economically valuable, politically and socially desirable and scientifically challenging issue.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM0901    

 The main objective of the Action  is to improve the understanding of proton and metal ion translocation across bio-membranes and the fate of such chemicals following their uptake by bridging neighbouring scientific fields and fostering applicative outcomes. "Molecular machineries for ion translocation across biomembranes" is a strongly interdisciplinary COST Action  aiming at coordinating the research efforts of the participant groups in elucidating mechanistic details of proton and metal transfer processes and in exploring their potential applications in the biosynthesis of new materials and in the environment. The Action  is organised in four Working Groups whose coordinated activities will help to generate a more detailed description of how protons and metal cations and oxyanions are translocated across biological membranes, how they interact with their target proteins having crossed the membrane and how these metabolic processes can be controlled and eventually utilised for the biosynthesis of nanostructured inorganic and metal materials and in bioremediation.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM0902    

 The main objective of the Action  is to generate a synergistic approach for utilisation of biomass for sustainable fuels  chemicals through cooperation between scientists from different member states and different areas and disciplines. This Action  is aimed at coordinating scientific innovations within Europe in order to improve existing methods or develop new ones for utilisation of biomass to produce biofuels, platform and specialty chemicals in accordance with the safety and environmental requirements. Special emphasis will be placed on the utilisation of lignocellulose biomass, algae and non-edible crops, which does not compete with food. It will involve the use of green catalytic methodologies (homogeneous, heterogeneous, enzymatic and photocatalysis) and novel reaction media. Moreover, alternative biomass-based products that are safer and have a reduced environmental footprint, (e.g. biodegradable polymers) will be explored. The Action  is also linked to extended biorefinery concepts in wood and pulp industry and to greener and more economic energy utilization between plants and communities. Successful results will be a result of the cooperation of both scientists and R D workers in universities, research institutes and in industry.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM0903    

 The main objective of this Action  is to establish a dedicated platform and a knowledge-based approach for the development of intermetallic compounds as methanol steam reforming catalysts. The deep understanding of the underlying processes will enable a rational development of catalysts with high economic impact. This Action  is generating the fundamentals necessary to develop the next generation of industrial catalysts for clean hydrogen production via one step steam reforming of methanol, a basic building block of many future applications - mobile and stationary - of a hydrogen-based economy, meeting European economic and societal needs. Due to its huge socio-economic impact, methanol steam reforming is a catalytic application with a high potential and a world wide impact. Methanol is an efficient and easy to handle hydrogen carrier, thus being distinguished for a hydrogen based energy infrastructure. Intermetallic compounds have an enormous potential as catalysts thanks to their electronic and geometric structure. In different scientific groups research on intermetallic compounds or methanol steam reforming is ongoing independently. This COST action aims at connecting these groups and coordinating R D, developing a knowledge-based scientific approach, Technological Road Maps and initiation of new joint research projects to bridge knowledge gaps, driven by scientific curiosity, as well as by industrial and societal needs. The network delivers, along with the proof of principle, a final Technological Road Map to stable and highly selective catalysts for methanol steam reforming ready for industrial implementation. Development and implementation of this road map will be achieved through dedicated projects with external funding (national and international level).       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM0904    

 The main objective of this Action  is to focus the European activities in the field of organocatalysis in order to promote this field to a higher scientific level. As a result a higher utilization of the innovative potential of organocatalysis is expected. The main idea of this COST Action  - called ORCA (organocatalysis) - is to provide a knowledge platform to advance different kinds of organocatalyzed transformations to broadly applicable methods in academia as well as in industry. The large number of publications and activities in the field of enantioselective catalysis requires a concentration of different developments and efforts of organocatalytic transformations. There is also a need to supply the scientific community with systematic information and data. A welcome stage to this objective is the COST Action . This program will allow interaction between European scientists within this network. The exchange of all available data, ideas and methodologies will give a significant push for further developments in organocatalysis. Beneficiaries of this Action  will be researchers of industry and academia as well as young researchers.        Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM0905    

 The complexity of human life arises from some twenty thousand genes, and results due to alternative splicing mechanism in approx. 100000 proteins. By posttranslational modifications these proteins are converted into an array of some 1.5 million different functional entities. Interestingly, this conversion can either be enzymatically controlled and regulated, or may have an apparently random aspect due to non-enzymatic reactions. Proteins undergo a wide array of non-enzymatic post-translational modifications. Such modifications of proteins are often determined by their environments, their structural features and by a number of protecting structures, and also by free radicals generated in their vicinity. Non-enzymatic protein modifications are, therefore, not random, but occur in a non-regulated manner and depend largely on the protein and its environment.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1001    

 CODECS (COnvergent Distributed Environment for Computational Spectroscopy) is an interdisciplinary COST Action  which aims at creating a network dedicated to computational spectroscopy, i.e. to the extraction of structural and dynamical features of molecular and supramolecular systems by in silico  analysis of spectroscopic observables. The Action  is organised in four Working Groups whose activities will cooperate to develop a modular, integrated computational tool for resonance, vibrational, and optical spectroscopies based on multiscale computational approaches in space and time, at quantum, semi-classical and classical levels of description of structural/dynamic molecular phenomena.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1002    

 Biological oxidation reactions utilizing dioxygen, superoxide, hydrogen peroxide, or water as oxidants are the most common metal catalyzed reactions in in biology. Despite the intense study of such reactions, key knowledge remains to be established in many cases - e.g. the nature of the active oxidant and the molecular mechanism of oxidation. In this Action , scientists are studying not only the mechanisms of important oxidation reactions via biophysical studies on relevant metalloenzymes and/or model complexes, as well as by computational modelling, but are also designing new catalysts for such reactions. Two classes of potential new catalysts are investigated: (i) artificial metalloproteins  , i.e. small metalloproteins, produced primarily by de novo  synthesis, that contain active sites that are direct mimics of those found in metalloenzymes (ii)coordination complexes that reproduce essential features of enzyme active sites.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1003    

 Protein profiling probes, designed and prepared by synthetic chemists, have high potential as tools to study proteomes. We aim to bring together a group of chemical biologists that share common interests in their attempts to design and synthesize probes for chemical proteomics and for unraveling important biosynthetic pathways. Examples of such probes are those with which specific proteins or protein families can be targeted within a proteome for enrichment and subsequent identification and analysis. Synthetic probes directed at enzymes (also referred to as activity-based probes) report on the presence of active enzymes, and not on mere polypeptide expression levels. Alternatively, synthetic probes can be used to identify unknown receptors as well as post-translational modification events. New probes and innovative methods of analysis are urgently needed, and with this Action  we will provide a common platform to develop and share  these important tools for fundamental and applied biological and biomedical research.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1004    

 The objective of this COST Action  is to develop supramolecular systems that work in water. Such supramolecular systems should allow to (i) monitor environmentally or biologically relevant species in water (ii) control selectivity of reactions in water, and (iii) produce self-assembled organized structures in water which are stimuli responsive and which can be used for programming functions in materials and devices. The Action  aims at improving our understanding of the multiple weak non-covalent, but collectively powerful interactions that allow efficient and selective recognition processes to occur in water.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1005    

 The main objective is to attain a concerted, organised collaborative research activity that effectively focuses on areas of strategic importance to f-element chemistry in Europe and to foster an environment where, via a multi-group approach (including industry), remarkably novel, transformative f-element research is delivered which forms the basis for, or is, inter- and multi-disciplinary in nature. f-Element chemistry (the block of 28 elements at the bottom of the periodic table) contributes to medical imaging, magnetic, electronic, and photonics devices, catalysis, energy, and metal extraction and is therefore strategically crucial to EU science, energy, security, training, sustainability, and society. Despite this, research, teaching, and key skills of f-element chemistry are disappearing from universities, but it is essential that knowledge is improved and handed down. There is no coordinated forum for cooperative mobility mechanisms for nationally funded f-element chemists pursuing fundamental frontier research to initiate collaborations, training, networking, and dissemination with each other. This Action  will provide mechanisms to promote such goals by establishing a network linking the EU f-element community in order to invigorate and expand the area. This will enhance the supply routes of trained researchers from universities to industry, restructure the EU science-base, and give research output greater than the sum of its parts.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1006    

 Colloid chemistry is a steadily growing field of immense importance. The enormous diversity of the colloidal processes involved in novel materials and their applications in both advanced technologies and everyday life cannot be overstated. There is a compelling need for exchange, coordination and cooperation in the European colloid community. This Action  will combine coherently the outstanding European expertise in this field, including: theoretical modelling and experimental formation of functional and patterned interfaces; self-assembly of molecules and colloidal particles; synthesis and up-scaling of novel nano-colloidal and bio-colloidal materials; the kinetic and catalytic aspects of these novel materials; and their applications in chemical, pharmaceutical and food industries, as well as in nano-devices such as sensors, assays, photonics and bio-fuel cells. This includes many of the Grand Challenges in energy, health and environmental protection. The Action  will provide a platform for coordination of national programs and will stimulate academia-industry cooperation. The Action s main deliverables will be the increased networking in colloid chemistry through the organization of scientific events (conferences, workshops), training schools and STSMs. Through an extensive mobility program targeted to early stage researchers, it will encourage their involvement in the research at the international level.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1101    

 Carbohydrates constitute the most abundant class of biomolecules on Earth. They have diverse biological roles ranging from energy storage to mediating interactions between living cells.  Carbohydrates that are attached to proteins, lipids and synthetic multivalent scaffolds (i.e. glycoconjugates) can be used as anti-adhesive drugs against bacteria or viruses, or bioimaging agents that can target specific tissues. However, they can also have applications in materials science as nanoscale building blocks for hydrogels and templates for making nano-structured hard materials. We aim to build a dynamic network across Europe focused on developing glycoconjugates for nanoscience applications. We will develop new methods for producing nanomaterials for applications in drug delivery, in gene targeting and as diagnostic/prognostic tools. The Action  will foster new collaborations to transform glycoconjugate research in Europe by establishing a new frontier at the interface with nanoscience.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1102    

 The therapy of neuropsychiatric disorders is limited by the high variability of symptoms and behavioural disturbances. Few drugs are available to address specific subsets of neurological/mental symptoms, and none to aid in diagnosis or to stop the progress of neurodegenerative disorders. Neurotransmitters such as dopamine and serotonin play a central role in the pathophysiology of major neuropsychiatric illnesses, such as anxiety and mood disorders, schizophrenia, autism-spectrum disorders, Parkinson s disease, epilepsy, and dementias. Neurotransmitter-binding proteins such as receptors, transporters and common metabolic enzymes are the starting points for development of tools to diagnose and drugs to treat specific clusters of symptoms. Structure-based drug design, synthetic chemistry and biological characterisation will inform the choice of lead compounds to treat select subsets of brain malfunction. COST collaboration facilitates the cross-disciplinary interaction for discovery of promiscuous drugs for diagnosis and treatment of complex brain diseases. In addition to addressing a clinical need, bringing together academic scientists with a broad range of techniques and knowledge, this close collaboration will enrich interdisciplinary scientific training to design chemical tools for neuropathology across Europe, and provide lead compounds with the potential for transfer to the European pharmaceutical industry.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1103    

 Reducible metal oxides are most versatile solid state compounds exhibiting a rich chemistry related to changes of the metal oxidation state. As complex materials like porous networks, nanocrystals and functionalised surfaces, they play a paramount role in (photo)catalysis, microelectronics, energy conversion and storage, sensor and fuel cell technologies. The Action  unites objective driven experimental and theoretical research devoted to (1) exploring the origins and details of reducibility in oxides, (2) creating novel routes for the growth and synthesis of nanostructured reducible oxide systems, (3) exploiting and tailoring reducibility in oxide systems to yield specific functionalities and (4) exploring novel applications and visionary concepts for the future use of reducible oxide materials. The gained fundamental understanding opens up new ways to explore, control, and tailor chemical reactivity, thus facilitating rational design of novel oxide structures with unique properties. This allows establishing trend-setting technologies and fosters advances by related European industries. European experts coordinating their highly innovative joint research on reducible oxides via this Action  will address important future societal and economic issues like efficient and green synthesis of chemicals and environmentally friendly energy conversion.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1104    

 This Action  will focus on the development of novel metallo-drugs in a structure-targeted approach. By targeting specific protein clefts, RNA, and less common but functional DNA structures, biomolecular recognition processes involving metal complexes will be exploited in the design of innovative metallo-drugs. A particular focus will be given to structural details of the molecular interaction between the metal complexes and their biomolecular targets. In addition, the process of targeting and delivery, the interactions of the metallo-drugs on the cellular level, and prodrugs with novel activation strategies that get activated only at their target site will be investigated. The metal complexes include bioorganometallic compounds, rigid polynuclear complexes of defined shape, and other coordination compounds. Drugs based on metal complexes offer an extremely diverse structural chemistry and are excellent candidates to explore new three-dimensional space when targeting biomacromolecules. The ultimate aim will be the development of new therapies for cancer, infectious, and virus-related diseases. An additional benefit will be the design of metal complexes as tools for diagnostics and in fundamental research.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1105    

 This COST Action  aims to unite researchers with expertise in rational drug design and the medicinal chemistry of synthetic and natural compounds with biomedical investigators dedicated to the understanding the mechanisms governing drug resistance in cancer stem cells. Cancer stem cells  (CSC)  are a subpopulation of cells within tumors that exhibit enhanced tumor-initiating attributes and are a major contributing factor to current cancer therapy failure. The CSC phenotypic state comprises distinct molecular and functional differences that underpin resistance to current treatments and the unique ability spread and to seed new tumors throughout the body. This insight necessitates an entirely new approach to cancer drug development to effectively target tumor CSCs. Through exchange of information, experience and expertise, researcher mobility and fostering new collaboration between chemistry and biology groups, the Action endeavours to develop new, effective methods for identifying novel compounds and drug candidates that target drug-resistant cancer stem cells.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1106    

 Knowledge of chemical reactivity is essential for understanding at a molecular level the mechanistic steps that drive processes in life sciences. This COST Action  aims to enhance the role of chemistry as a central discipline for understanding free radical biological events. This goal will be achieved through the implementation of biomimetic chemical models. Four working groups will focus on: enzymatic activities via free radical species; the formation and fate of free radicals involving nucleic acids; membrane lipids in stress and ageing; and synthetic methodologies inspired by natural free radical processes. The research groups participating in the Action  will create an interdisciplinary framework, in which a younger generation of investigators can broaden their expertise by studying the diversity of free radical interactions in biological systems for metabolic, synthetic and catalytic activities through biomimetic models.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1201    

 PERSPECT-H2O will enable spectroscopy/theory guided design of supramolecular photocatalysts for water splitting, and hence the generation of molecular hydrogen as a renewable fuel. The network will integrate leading European groups and national research centers, focusing on a central theme of contemporary research in homogeneous photocatalysis and integration of supramolecular photocatalysts towards the construction of functional materials. The Action  combines synthetic chemistry, photophysics and photochemistry, electrochemistry, and theory aiming at (i) a detailed molecular mechanistic understanding of photoinduced reaction steps in supramolecular photocatalytic water splitting, and (ii) development of functional systems. The envisioned approach identifies relations between molecular and electronic structure, photoinduced structural and electronic dynamics, catalytic efficiency, and the stability of long-lived intermediates and catalytically active species. Finally it yields functional photocatalytic materials based on earth-abundant elements and prototypes of supramolecular photocatalytic water-splitting systems.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1202    

 Polyoxometalates (POMs) are molecular metal oxides with dimensions in the nanometer range. Their uniquely versatile properties provide the basis for advances in catalysis, alternative energy sources, magnetic, electronic and photonic devices and medicine that are crucial to European science and technology. However, the global pre-eminence of European POM research is currently jeopardized by a rapid growth in activity in China, India and Pacific Rim states, where POM chemistry is recognized as critically important. The main objective of PoCheMoN is to accelerate POM-based Molecular Nanoscience by creating a coherent network for world-leading education and research in POM chemistry. This first overarching COST Action  in this area will consolidate the European POM community and promote strategic and efficient POM research through collaboration, thereby creating a readily accessible knowledge base for the rapid uptake of POM chemistry into Molecular Nanoscience and generating breakthrough technologies through links with aligned disciplines and companies. Coordinated mobility will engender new research collaborations, training exchanges and rapid dissemination of results, thereby protecting key skills, growing the skill-base of early-stage researchers and enhancing research output to ensure that Europe benefits from sector leadership into the future in the face of strong competition from the rapidly expanding far-east effort.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1203    

 The use of novel light sources and fast ions is opening new avenues in the study of chemical reactivity. XUV/X-ray pulses with attosecond duration permit to "visualize" the movement of electrons inside a molecule and a much better control of chemical reactions. X-ray Free Electron Lasers, synchrotrons or collision with fast ions can be used to generate molecules in highly excited and highly charged states that present new and unexpected reactivity. The study of molecules under these extreme intensities and time resolution conditions requires new theoretical models that can serve as guidance for experiments. The scientific objective of the Action  is to understand, monitor and control the complex ultrafast electronic and nuclear dynamics that occur in medium-sized and large molecules, to develop new control strategies of reactions and to develop a new generation of ultrafast spectroscopies combining attosecond temporal and sub-Angstrom spatial resolutions. This is an interdisciplinary field in which European groups are very active but work separately. COST is thus the perfect framework to enhance exchange of knowledge, bringing together leading experts in generating, manipulating and modeling these new phenomena. The collaboration between groups will reinforce the European leadership in XUV/X-ray-, attosecond-, synchrotron- and ion-based research in chemistry.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1204    

 CARISMA will set the stage for an unprecedented Action  where the most advanced computational and experimental minds will meet to foster synergies with one priority mission: disruptive catalysis. The Action  will provide new processes for the selective and sustainable transformation of small and pervasive molecules like H 2 O, CO 2 , NH 3  into high-value chemical feedstocks and energy resources. CARISMA will promote new collaborations, lab-knowledge exchange, frontier training, and a virtual open-space to enable a strongly iterative advancement of theory and experiment, with input from experts in computational chemistry, spectroscopy, kinetics, catalysis, synthesis and materials science. Such interactions will spur the discovery of innovative catalytic processes and of advanced theory. Methods and concepts emerging from CARISMA will significantly shorten demands of time and resources for catalyst optimization, and will result in tailor-made systems with broad implications for fundamental and industrial areas.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1205    

 The objective of this Action  is to coordinate European research activities and knowledge exchange on ionic liquids (ILs, low melting salts, many of them liquid at room temperature and below) and to explore their full potential in the context of fundamental and applied chemistry, materials science and engineering. The COST Action  will provide a coordinated forum for; an efficient intra- and interdisciplinary knowledge and expertise exchange, networking and dissemination of information and results, training and initiating collaborations, harmonizing research activities, establishing an open public database and supplying the scientific community with systematic high quality information on ILs and their applications. The Action  aims to combat misinformation as well as contradicting data and reports. EXIL will facilitate technology transfer from university to industry, enhance the supply routes of trained researchers from universities to industry, and structure the European science base. Transferring ILs from the laboratory workbench to true beneficial applications is the long-term goal of EXIL - the European exchange network on Ionic Liquids. An IL-COST action will lead to an improvement of everyday life through new and improved technologies and materials, not to mention cleaner and safer production techniques and will thus contribute to strengthening European research and economy.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1206    

 G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are the largest family of proteins involved in signal transduction across membranes and one of the most important pharmaceutical drug target classes. In the past five years, an unprecedented number of X-ray structures of GPCRs have been solved, affording us first peeks at the molecular details of their function. Based on these and forthcoming structures, this COST Action  will bring together experts in a wide range of complementary methods to unravel details of the activation mechanism, ligand binding, and the effect of the membrane and other interaction partners on GPCRs. The information exchange that will be made possible by the COST Action  will lead to innovative insights into mechanistic details of GPCR function. This will in turn give rise to novel effector molecules to be used as lead structures for drug development, offering valuable new opportunities for European pharmaceutical research and industry.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1207    

 Electron-induced chemistry of volatile precursor molecules is central to Focused Electron Beam Induced Deposition (FEBID), a very promising direct deposition technique for nanofabrication, capable of producing free-standing 3D structures of sub-10 nm size. However, to date, FEBID relies on precursors developed specifically for chemical vapour deposition (CVD), a thermally driven process. These precursors are not optimized for the electron-driven FEBID process. Thus, to reach its full scientific and commercial potential, molecular precursors particularly adapted to the electron-induced fragmentation mechanisms in FEBID are urgently needed. This requires a concerted approach linking fundamental knowledge on electron-driven chemistry in FEBID with rational design and chemical synthesis of novel, superior precursor molecules. The Action  will network the relevant research communities including both experiment and theory, to perform the fundamental research that is needed and to translate the generated knowledge to novel FEBID precursors. Participation of research groups in FEBID technology and industrial partners will further allow rapid transfer of the results into industrial processing. This unique programme will ensure that EU academia and industry remain the leaders in development and commercial exploitation of FEBID.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1301    

 This Action  on Smart Inorganic Polymers (SIPs) will synergise the European activities in relevant areas in order to establish widely applicable rules for the rational design of smart inorganic polymers. The combination of leading scientists with common motivation but diverse expertise (main group/transition metal chemistry, polymer synthesis, characterisation, processing, applications, and theory) in concert with industrial partners will act as a nucleus for translational efforts towards the design and application of novel inorganic polymers (e.g., polyphosphazenes, polyamino- or phosphinoboranes, polysilanes, metallopolymers, nanoparticle-based hybrids). The network will coordinate and concentrate scattered existing national programmes and informal collaborations, which will be kick-started by including new complementary skills. SIPs will intensify the European exchange of knowledge and technologies and provide a forum for recent developments and innovative aspects. By implementing a sorely missed annual European conference on inorganic polymers, SIPs will increase its visibility in related communities. This will allow the systematic expansion of SIPs by inclusion of additional interested parties with desirable expertise and resources to boost the developments in this area.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1302    

 Systems Biocatalysis is a new approach consisting of organizing enzymes in vitro to generate an artificial metabolism for synthetic purposes. The strategy of this key new platform deals with the analysis of enzymatic systems in vivo, the development and discovery of new biocatalysts, and their assembly in vitro into novel synthetic metabolic pathways. This network aims at the controllable construction of metabolic pathways for the efficient synthesis of valuable chemical products. Tasks involved are the discovery of new biocatalyst, the optimization of their function, mutual compatibility and regulation, and the construction of a continuous flux for high efficiency. These tasks require research in various disciplines, as well as in molecular and engineering aspects of whole synthetic reaction  sequences. Therefore this multidisciplinary Action  is organized by an innovative grid WG  structure. The latter will interface vertical thematic pillars with horizontal technology bridges, to foster a profound integration of the ERA . The new collaborative research network will develop innovative methods for the discovery, design, optimization, and use of novel biocatalytic modules towards a plug-and-play enzymatic toolbox concept. This platform will be instrumental for the training of the next generation of researchers in cutting-edge technologies and for the rapid translation of results into value creation by European industries.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1303    

 Complex chemical systems have a huge potential for delivering new applications in areas ranging from materials science (in the short term) to medicine (in the long term). Complex systems are also highly relevant to fundamental questions such as the origin of life. Research on complex chemical systems has developed in parallel in three poorly connected communities working on supramolecular chemistry, far-from-equilibrium systems and the origin of life, respectively. This proposal aims to establish Europe as a world-leader in the emerging area of complex chemical systems, by bringing together these research fields. Main objectives are to develop far-from-equilibrium self-assembly and self-replicating systems, self-assembling and reproducing compartments, and the use of information-rich molecules in these contexts. The approach to these subjects is inherently multidisciplinary and will only be possible by combining the expertise of different theoretical and experimental research groups around Europe.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1304    

 It has long been recognized that metal spin states play a central role in the reactivity of important biomolecules, in industrial catalysis and in spin crossover compounds. The latter offer many exciting possibilities for novel, switchable materials with applications in computer storage and display devices. Elucidating the role and effect of different spin states on the properties of a system is presently one of the most challenging endeavours both from an experimental and theoretical point-of-view. In this ECOSTBio Action  we create a network of both experimental and theoretician research groups that will tackle a diversity of chemical problems where spin is an important factor. This will be achieved by the joint creation of a SPINSTATE database of systems with known spin states and spin-related properties. This freely accessible database will be of great benefit for the scientific community at large, and will lead to scientific and technological advances. Based on it we will exert explicit control of spin states of transition-metal compounds through rational design of ligand coordination. The interactions of theorists and experimentalists will create a synergy, helping theoreticians to validate their models and experimentalists to improve the performances of novel materials with desired properties.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1305    

 Structural biology has seen tremendous progress in the elucidation of static atomic structures of increasingly complex biomolecular systems, many of which are potential targets for future molecular medicine and biotechnology applications.  However, understanding of biomolecular mechanism and function also requires knowledge of dynamics, both locally at active sites and more globally in terms of long range domain movements. These dynamic aspects are fundamentally important but difficult to study, often requiring both spectroscopic and structural complementary approaches and methods. Recent advances in the development of such methods make it timely to establish an EU network to bring together the spectroscopic and structural biology communities that will enable integration of the static and dynamic aspects of important biomolecules. This Action  will promote the collaborations necessary to achieve this integration, and will disseminate knowledge and target research that will ultimately translate into new understanding of complex biochemical processes. Such knowledge will foster insights into disease states and lead to new biotechnology and future drug discoveries. It will consolidate and further enhance the world-leading role of European groups in these areas and provide a platform for training and promoting ESRs, through a tailored program of Summer Schools, Workshops, Short-Term Scientific Missions, and conferences.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1306    

 Advances in the chemotherapy against human and animal parasitic diseases remain limited largely because drug candidates have low specificity and show poor in vivo  bioavailability. The Action  aims at uniting scientists with different backgrounds to create synergistic interactions paving the way for antiparasitic drug discovery for diseases caused by protozoa and helminths. The scientific aim is to bundle together the identification and validation of parasite drug targets based on the established genomes, medicinal chemistry including structure-based drug design, crystallography, bioinformatics, and drug targeting using chemical and nanotechnological approaches to improve drug performance. Also, rational assessment of the potential of natural product and other compound libraries will be used to identify new leads. Crucially, the Action  will create an unprecedented combined forum for human health scientists and veterinarians, because of the enormous unmet needs in treating human and animal parasitic diseases and due to methodological homogeneity of their drug design strategies. The most promising compounds and formulations will be tested in established infection models before further preclinical and clinical development with emphasis on drug safety. Expected benefits include intensified cooperations between Academia and Industry. This will be achieved through focused conferences, networking, a dedicated website and training schools for state-of-the-art technologies.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1307    

 A large variety of chemical compounds, from hydrides to complex organic species, is observed in star and planet forming regions. These complex species are also detected in present-day comets and meteorites, possibly as witnesses of the early stages of Solar System formation. An active chemistry proceeds in the harsh environments of pre-stellar cores and proto-planetary disks, where UV photons or X-rays irradiate cold diluted gases and ices, and radicals are copiously produced. The aim of this Action  is to bring together laboratory and theoretical gas phase and surface chemistry as well as large facilities based experiments with the aim of rationalizing the molecular evolution. Specific markers, such as isotopic fractionation, ices composition, and abundance ratios of isomers, must be used and understood, in order to draw a coherent picture of our chemical origins. Succeeding former European initiatives that shaped the field of Astrochemistry, this Action  focuses on the molecular evolution towards higher complexity. Being a stepping-stone for building models, the Action  would deliver new schemes for physical chemistry at large, like chemistry of transient species and photochemistry, in gas or on surfaces.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1401    

 Typically during chemical manufacturing, crystallization is employed as a purification step or to isolate the final product. Crystallization determines the quality of the product obtained but understanding the molecular mechanisms which occur during crystallization remains a scientific challenge, particularly for organic compounds. Developments in advanced analytical techniques, molecular recognition probes and computational methodologies are beginning to provide insight into how molecules interact in solution, aggregate and, ultimately, form crystals. Together with studies in different phases, in confined systems, on surfaces and with impurities, this will improve our understanding of crystallization processes.  The EU plays host to recognised global leaders in different aspects of crystallization which, if brought together, will be in a unique position to drive the molecular understanding of the crystallization process. Crystal Engineering has advanced so that there is understanding of the supramolecular interactions in molecular solids. The next step is to fully understand structure/function relationships in order to custom design new materials for specific applications. European researchers need to embrace this new paradigm in materials design, combine it with the developing insights into the crystallization processes, and exploit both of these to control crystallization processes with increased product yield and purity, and also reduced environmental impact and cost.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1402    

 Photoluminescent upconverting nanomaterials (UCNMs) are lanthanide-doped nanocrystals that emit visible light under near-infrared excitation. The unique anti-Stokes emission enables background-free luminescent detection, which is essential for many diagnostic applications, bioimaging and chemical sensing. UCNMs are highly photostable and display narrow line-like emissions that enable long observation times and multiplexed detection. Research on photon-upconversion is highly interdisciplinary, but currently fragmented without synchronised research actions in Europe. Further progress in the field is severely restricted by the lack of unified methods for the synthesis, functionalization and characterisation of UCNMs. Missing reference materials and commercial instrumentation make it impossible to compare the results from different groups and precludes the commercialisation of bioanalytical assays, biosensors and diagnostic tools based on these highly promising materials. Consequently, a European network is required to coordinate basic and applied research on UCNMs, standardise procedures, and to make European scientists as well as the high-tech industry aware of this emerging technology. This Action  is based on a broad range of scientific disciplines to identify and solve numerous research problems such as upconversion enhancement, surface (bio)functionalisation, detection instrumentation, bioanalytical and diagnostic applications, as well as (nano)toxicity.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1403    

 The primary aim of the proposed Action  is to create a Europe-wide network of world leading academic and research institutions and key industries to promote the use of smart energy carriers on a large scale in order to increase fuel flexibility and carbon efficiency of energy production and to support distributed energy generation strategies. The approach to accomplish this aim is twofold. On the one hand, academic/research organizations will devote strong efforts to bring together fundamental/advanced numerical and diagnostic tools to improve the understanding of combustion kinetics and by-products formation of smart energy carriers at micro/meso-scale levels. On the other hand, the intended exchange between academic and industrial partners will support the optimization of tools developed in the Action  exploiting the way that smart energy carriers could be utilised at the macro-scale in advanced combustion technology devices. This interaction will lead to the identification of standards and criteria for development of a searchable database and Internet tool devoted to integration of experimental and numerical combustion chemical/physical data which will provide an easy access to such information relevant to smart energy carrier components.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1404    

 Interpretation of sophisticated experiments often requires advanced theories. A consistent set of user-friendly tools for an elaborate treatment of nuclear motions of microscopic and macroscopic systems does not yet exist. Development of the armoury of first-principles nuclear motion theory, via the advancement of theories, algorithms, and codes, is the major goal of this Action , with special emphasis on quantum effects involving electrons as well as nuclei. Molecular scientists, modellers and engineers will all benefit from the new methods and codes. The developments cover quantum chemical, quantum dynamical, semi-classical, and advanced classical treatments. Access to most of the source codes developed within the Action  is provided to the scientific community free of charge. Multifaceted collaborative efforts with experimentalists applying the pilot versions of the new tools is considered to be vital to the success of the Action . MOLIM is a platform for (a) development of an extensive, heavily interlinked collaboration network of theorists and experimentalists from more than 20 countries; (b) quick dissemination of important results to a large and growing scientific community; and (c) establishment of long-lasting EU-wide conferences and training schools, educating the next generation of users of the next generation of chemistry tools.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1405    

 Epigenetics refers to dynamic changes that occur at the DNA, RNA and protein level in eukaryotes. Epigenetics is at the heart of gene regulation and determines which genes are activated or silenced. It is of great importance fundamentally and has many exciting translational aspects including therapeutics, microbial pathway engineering and agriculture. The key objective of the Action  is to establish the first European chemical biology network focused on epigenetics. This Action  will provide common ground for researchers from academia, research institutes, SMEs and multinational organizations.The fruitful interactions between these sectors will lead to the creation of new chemical tools as well as leads for therapeutics and agrochemicals. The Action 's second objective is to increase awareness of epigenetics within the European scientific community and it will provide training for ESRs and emphasise inclusiveness by COST priority member countries.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1406    

 Natural products (NP) have had a major impact on chemistry, chemical biology and drug discovery and have been part of medical remedies since ancient times. Nowadays, NP represent a unique source of leads for medicinal chemistry and drugs derived from NP have found widespread use for the treatment of cancer, cardiovascular diseases, bacterial and fungal infections. The general aim of this COST Action  is to advance the field and to maintain the high level of expertise in NP chemistry within Europe by combining synthetic chemistry, computational chemistry, chemical biology, and pharmacology to find new lead structures of pharmaceutical relevance. Since chemistry plays a key role in addressing the industrial requirements for preclinical candidates in terms of physicochemical properties of NP and their analogues, this Action  further aims to promote the translation between fundamental academic research and industrial drug discovery by means of NP chemistry.       Chemistry and Molecular Sciences and Technologies COST Action CM1407    

 1. Objectives The main objective of the Action  is to achieve a general method for homogenising climate and environmental datasets. The method will be an improved synthesis of the most effective statistical procedures for detection and correction of Essential Climate Variables at different space and time scales. The main objective will be accomplished through fulfilling the following secondary objectives: - Provide practical rules for the implementation of homogenisation. - Provide tools for comparison and evaluation of different methods. - Analyse the strengths and weaknesses of the methods for different applications. - Provide methods for evaluating uncertainties resulting from homogenisation. - Provide an evaluation of specific artificial changes, such as the impact of urban effect on temperature series for example. This will be applicable to commonly observed datasets (temperature, precipitation, air-pressure, vapour-pressure, sunshine duration ) as well as upper-air observations (radiosonde data), data provided by numerical weather forecast models, reanalysis data and climate proxy data.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES0601    

 Air quality is a key element for the well-being and quality of life of European citizens. It is regulated by EU legislation, which requires monitoring and assessment of air pollution (using modelling tools where there is no observational data), informing the public on air quality, forecasting the potential exceedances, implementation of short term action plans and air quality management to attain specific limit and target values. As air pollution crosses national borders, it would be cost-effective and beneficial for citizens and society and decision-makers that national chemical weather forecast and information systems would be networked and seamless across Europe. This Action will provide a forum for harmonizing, standardising and benchmarking approaches and practices in data exchange and multi-model capabilities for air quality forecast and (near) real-time information systems in Europe. It will examine existing and work out new solutions for integrating the development efforts at national and international levels. This Action will not develop or create the whole system, but rather support and complement ongoing initiatives (e.g., in the framework of GMES - Global Monitoring for Environment and Security) towards the same goals. In particular, it will serve as a platform for the information exchange between the meteorological services, environmental agencies, and international initiatives. Keywords : Chemical weather forecasts, multi-model simulation, information systems network, data exchange, air quality, GMES       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES0602    

 Diseases due to aeroallergens are among major causes of a growing rate of morbidity and demand for healthcare. The overall prevalence of seasonal allergic rhinitis in Europe is about 15% and increasing. Adequate protective and pre-emptive measures require both the reliable assessment of production and release of various pollen species, and the forecasting of their atmospheric dispersion. The World Health Organization has therefore recommended new studies in the area. The pollen-related research is currently conducted within several scientific disciplines, countries and targeted activities; however, their coordination could be substantially improved. Several poorly understood complex biological, meteorological and climatic factors can significantly affect the timing and strength of pollen seasons. Their proper investigation requires an integrated approach. The proposed concerted Action  will establish a multi-disciplinary forum for (i) the critical review of existing information and its use in current assessment systems, and finding out the gaps of knowledge; (ii) the improved co-ordination of on-going research; (iii) the development of a strategy and an action plan that aim to bridge the gaps of knowledge; (iv) strengthening the dialogue with end users. Specific research directions will be: Pollen Production and Release; Pollen Transport, Transformation and Interaction; Applications and collaboration with End Users. Keywords : pollen; aerobiology; phenology; allergic season forecasting; air quality       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES0603    

 The proposed Action  brings together leading European scientists to address the issue of atmospheric water vapour and its impact on climate. This Action  is needed to integrate research carried out in different areas, including: atmospheric monitoring, data analysis and modelling. It brings together expertise that is both unique and timely. In order to make significant progress in the field of water vapour and climate, it is necessary to integrate knowledge acquired from research based on different methodologies. To achieve this, the Action  is structured into 4 working groups which together aim to increase knowledge on observations, theory, and data assimilation in the context of water vapour and climate. The objective is to offer to the scientific community and the broader Earth Observation community an integrative approach to understanding the processes controlling the atmospheric water vapour distribution, in particular those elements linking water vapour and climate. Beneficiaries of this Action  include the meteorological services, space agencies, environmental agencies and policy makers. The specific task of this Action  is to promote knowledge dissemination activities at various levels through scientific missions, thematic training schools, support toward conference participation, and special issues in world-class scientific journals. Keywords : Water vapour, climate, atmosphere, training, integrated approach, observations, models, data assimilation       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES0604    

 The main objective of the Action  is to place improved constraints on models of glacial isostatic adjustment through the development of state-of-the-art surface velocity measurements with the consequent production of new ice mass change estimates for the major ice sheets. This Action  addresses the current uncertainty in polar ice mass contributions to present-day global sea level rise. The focus is ice mass change signals derived from the Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE) satellite mission (2002-present). The ice mass change is derived from gravity-signals, which are contaminated by glacial isostatic adjustment (GIA). However, the GIA signal in the GRACE results currently exceeds the expected Antarctic ice mass balance signal. GIA models are data poor in polar-regions and new constraints from precise and geographically widespread surface velocity measurements are needed. Whilst surface velocity estimates have been derived in many of the key regions their accuracy and precision is presently too low. Recent advances (GIA modelling and geodetic observations) indicate that a collaborative approach at this point in time would lead to a significant improvement in GIA model accuracy. Further, additional data in key locations (Antarctic and Greenland) will be added during the International Polar Year (2007-9). These data will be available to the remodeling effort. In this Action  leading geodesists and geophysicists from Europe will focus together, to provide improved constraints on GIA models and, hence, on contemporary ice mass balance estimates for Antarctica, Greenland and the smaller ice caps. Keywords : Glacial isostatic adjustment, ice mass balance, Antarctica, Greenland, geodesy       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES0701    

 The main objective of the Action  is the specification, development and demonstration of cost-effective ground-based integrated profiling systems suitable for future networks providing essential atmospheric observations for both climate and weather.Climate and weather observations are essential for the development of climate change policies and weather services securing the safety and quality of life of the public. Atmospheric observing systems for GEOSS/GMES in Europe will be integrated to satisfy requirements for climate, environment and security. This Action  will coordinate deployment and further development of integrated ground-based remote sensing systems to provide key atmospheric variables such as clouds, winds, temperature and humidity. These systems observe at high time resolution providing observations of atmospheric processes relevant to climate and weather but will need to be cost-effective. Long term deployments (testbeds) of observing systems will be used to judge their effectiveness and cost-efficiency so design recommendations for the future European integrated observing network can be delivered. Development in data assimilation techniques will allow the observations to be fully exploited in numerical models. The observing infrastructure will also be used to evaluate and improve climate and weather forecast models, and to validate other observing systems, including satellite and aircraft. Keywords: Long term trials of ground-based integrated profiling systems, Cost effective upper air observing networks suitable for climate and weather, GEOSS/GMES (Global Earth Observations System of Systems/Global Monitoring for Environment and Security), WMO/GCOS (World Meteorological Organisation/Global Climate Observing System).       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES0702    

 The cycling of key trace elements in the ocean is critical to the functioning of ocean ecosystems, to the carbon cycle, to contamination of the ocean, and to assessment of past climate change. This COST Action  seeks to maximize the benefit from research on the marine chemistry of trace elements conducted in a large number of COST countries. National research cruises will use new analytical and modelling techniques to dramatically improve understanding of ocean trace-element cycles. This Action  will unite these national efforts with Working Groups focused on: i) maximizing the research achieved on nationally-funded cruises through international collaboration; ii) intercalibration and standardisation of analytical measurements across the European research area; and, iii) data management and the production of global data products for a wide range of end-users. A fourth Working Group will co-ordinate significant training and outreach activities, though which the Action  will generate an international community of young scientists who understand trace-element cycles sufficiently well to contribute to a wide range of future interdisciplinary studies. This Action  will liaise closely with international programmes with similar interests, particularly the GEOTRACES programme, and will allow realisation of cross-national goals of that programme within the European research area. Keywords: Ocean biogeochemistry, Climate paleoproxies, Marine data management, Trace element intercalibration       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES0801    

 Unmanned aerial systems (UAS) will be of large and increasing importance for environmental monitoring in the future, e.g. under the aspects of climate change and sustainable development. The Action  will coordinate ongoing and conceive future research on the development and application of UAS as a cost-efficient, trans-boundary method for the monitoring of the atmospheric boundary layer and the underlying surface of the Earth. These systems will help to close the recent observational gap between established ground based and satellite based measurements, and will provide relevant atmospheric data both with high temporal and spatial resolution and an unique data coverage in space and time. This will distinctly increase the understanding of the atmospheric boundary layer and related surface-atmosphere exchange processes which is crucial for future improvements in numerical weather prediction and climate simulation. First prototypes of UAS systems of different size, complexity and equipped with different instrumentation, have successfully proven their functionality. Based on this, the Action  will promote the conception and further development of prototypes for a fleet of UAS of different size, instrumentation, and operation range with respect to various specific observational requirements. Finally this interdisciplinary approach will establish a forum on the European level for the coordination of the relevant scientific, technical and legal aspects connected to a safe and permanent operation of UAS for routine environmental monitoring purposes. Keywords: unmanned aerial systems, environmental monitoring, atmospheric boundary-layer research, sensor technology and integration, UAS flight mechanics and control.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES0802    

 Space Weather originates mainly in solar activity and affects the interplanetary space and planetary magnetospheres, ionospheres and atmospheres. It can affect ground and space technological systems as well as humans in space. Extreme space weather conditions have economical consequences and may threaten safety and security of the technological infrastructures. In the US, important progress in modeling and predicting Space Weather effects has been made through the launch of large-scale research projects and the implementation of national prediction systems. Although Europe has much scientific expertise on the physics and effects of Space Weather, its optimal use suffers from a lack of coordination between the national research programmes. This Action  has the primary goal to form an interdisciplinary network between European scientists dealing with different issues of Geospace, as well as warning system developers and operators, to:  Foster the ties between European Geospace research and space technology establishments,  Assess the European potential in advanced Space Weather observational and modeling techniques and in reliable products and services,  Define the needs of a broad range of users and,  Determine and recommend the specifications for new products and services that best meet the user's requirements. Keywords: Space Weather, Geospace modeling and prediction, Space Weather nowcast and forecast, Space Weather products and services       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES0803    

 The global environment is a complex system with numerous intricately linked processes. The land surface-atmosphere interface plays a vital role in the functioning of the Earth System by controlling transfers of energy, momentum and matter. Thus, land atmosphere interactions are important factors controlling and affecting the Earth climate system. To increase and evaluate our understanding of the critical controlling processes, interactions and feedbacks between biosphere and atmosphere, long-term integrated interdisciplinary monitoring efforts are necessary. This COST Action  creates a platform for analysis, harmonisation, and synthesis, assessment of future needs and further development of a European integrated monitoring program for comprehensive trace gas flux observations. The existing national and European flux monitoring communities work separately; networking by this COST Action  creates added value and is invaluable to advance the continuity, scope and quality of flux monitoring. This Action  advances the applicability of produced data in climate and Earth system modelling research, as well as in more operational short to medium term forecasting of weather and air quality. Current methodologies, operationality, dissemination, and coordination will also be addressed in this COST Action . Development of common methodologies, data management systems and protocols will increase the reliability, value and cost-efficiency of European flux observations. Keywords: land-atmosphere interactions, energy and biogeochemical fluxes, multi-species flux monitoring, assimilation in climate and weather forecasting models, climate and global change       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES0804    

 The main objective of the Action  is a cross-disciplinary assessment of our current understanding of the terrestrial biosphere from an Earth system perspective to improve the reliability of future Earth system projections in coupled climate-biosphere simulations.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES0805    

 The main objective of the Action  is to use stable isotopes on C, N, O and water cycles as a critical research tool in Biosphere-Atmosphere-Earth System research across scales and disciplines to: 1) synthesize isolated experiments in Europe to identify innovative process- and system-oriented research areas; 2) assess current state-of-the-art models to improve process representation and to better link experimental and modelling communities; 3) benchmark and advance innovative cutting-edge technologies; 4) create a training/teaching network across Europe.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES0806    

 The main objective is to undertake a pan-European comparison and evaluation of methods for flood frequency estimation under the various climatologic and geographic conditions found in Europe, and different levels of data availability. This Action  undertakes a pan-European comparison and evaluation of different methods for flood frequency estimation under the various climatologic and geographic conditions found in Europe, and different levels of data availability. A scientific framework for assessing the ability of these methods to predict the impact of environmental change (climate change, land-use and river engineering works) on future flood frequency characteristics (flood occurrence and magnitude) will be developed and tested. The availability of such procedures is crucial for the formulation of robust flood risk management strategies as required by the Directive of the European Parliament on the assessment and management of floods. The outputs from FloodFreq will be disseminated to: academics, professionals involved in operational flood risk management from private and public institutions, and relevant policy makers from national and international regulatory bodies. This Action  enables cooperation between researchers involved in nationally funded research projects to, thereby enabling testing of methods free from the constraints of administrative boundaries, and allowing a more efficient use of European flood research funding.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES0901    

 The main objective is to quantify the methane input from marine and terrestrial sources into the atmosphere in the Arctic region, and ultimately to evaluate the impact of Arctic methane seepage on global climate. The Arctic is a key area in our anthropogenically-warming world as massive releases of methane currently locked up in permafrost and gas hydrates, both on land and in marine sediments, could increase atmospheric concentrations of this greenhouse gas much faster than predicted. The vast Arctic continental shelf, wetlands and Tundra might become major emitters of methane in the future. At present, there are a handful of unconnected projects involving research on methane seepage in this area. The exchange of information about these ongoing and also planned activities with respect to gas hydrate destabilization and permafrost thawing is minimal within the EU and almost non-existent at an international level. The aim of this Action  is to promote networking between the disparate groups within the EU, and to develop coherent links between the terrestrial and marine communities, with the ultimate goal of establishing a long-term monitoring project led by members of the EU, but also involving experts from Russia, the US and Canada. In order to achieve these objectives, work-visits, workshops, electronic-newsletters, sessions at conferences, data compilation and joint field campaigns are planned together with lobbying on EU and national levels to promote research on this important topic.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES0902    

 The main objective of the Action  is to develop common protocols and new instruments within a larger European network for optical measurements, bringing together scientists and industries in order to increase the reliability, value and cost-efficiency of the existing spectral observations within the European flux network. The Action  will focus entirely on the optical sampling strategies, which can be considered a fundamental tool in monitoring Biophysical Parameters (BP) and which act as a "bridge" between the flux tower and the remote sensing community. Flux towers remain a primary tool for understanding ecosystem carbon fluxes within the FLUXNET and CarboEurope IP networks. In the last years, important EU initiatives have been started (such as EUFAR, IMECC, ICOS and COST Action  ES0804) to coordinate a common dataset for characterizing the carbon balance of Europe. The objectives are also to standardise ground spectroradiometric measurements, to analyse the limits and opportunities of the current tools, to introduce a new low cost sensor to continuously monitor BP, and to facilitate interdisciplinary science collaborations between the optical sampling, remote sensing and flux tower scientific communities. Dissemination and coordination will be fundamental in this Action . Development of common measurement methodologies, data management systems, and metadata protocols will make a significant contribution to the European research community.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES0903    

 The main objective of this Action  is the coordination of ongoing research using gliders, and the conception of future research, to operate fleets of autonomous underwater gliders in order to provide cost-effective methods for the discovery and monitoring of the ocean at global, regional and coastal scales with benefit to both basic oceanographic research and operational applications for marine activities. Underwater gliders are intelligent and affordable platforms useful for long term multi parameter marine observations. They play an important role for present and planned marine observation networks. Deployed in swarms, they provide near real-time high spatial and temporal resolution data that will efficiently fill the gaps left by existing in-situ observation networks based on other marine platforms such as the profilers in the ARGO network. This will be beneficial for both academic oceanographic research and especially operational oceanography systems on which a large number of marine activities now rely. However, the deployment of swarms of gliders requires highly skilled operators and a sophisticated level of cooperation. The objective of the European Gliding Observatories  Action  is to build cooperation at the technological, scientific and organizational levels for a European capacity for sustained observations of the oceans with gliders.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES0904    

 The main objective of the Action  is to provide clear theoretical guidance on convection parameterizations for climate and numerical weather prediction models. Both global and regional atmospheric models are concerned. The Action  achieves this objective by creating a core theoretical group to address the fundamental issues of convection parameterization. Modellers and theoreticians join together under this framework. The Action  proposes a clear pathway for more coherent and effective parameterizations by integrating existing operational schemes and new theoretical ideas. Proposed alternative approaches intend to replace conventional tuning-based approaches. The Action  complements extensive inter-comparison based validations performed by operational modellers. The Action  responds particularly to urgent needs which have arisen from increasing the resolutions of forecast models. In these new-generation models, not only the traditional approximations break down, but associated physical processes become increasingly complex. Thus, the parameterization must be extensively re-formulated with more sophisticated physics under new constraints. The Action  contributes to reduce uncertainties in weather forecasts and climate projection by overcoming the often weak physical basis of the current parameterizations. Particular benefits will be in prediction of highly unusual extreme weather events, such as local heavy precipitation, tropical cyclone trajectories etc. The IPCC will be a particular international agent that will benefit from the present Action .       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES0905    

 The main objective of this Action  is to provide the scientific basis for estimating and preserving the goods and services arising from the productivity of European seagrass ecosystems under anthropogenic pressure. Seagrass ecosystems rank with coral reefs and tropical rainforests in their many ecosystem services, yet are drastically declining worldwide as a consequence of both anthropogenic and natural pressures including habitat fragmentation, eutrophication, poor water clarity and climate change stressors. In spite of this, the level of awareness is low and management ineffective. Seagrass research is fragmented and there is little integration between researchers and coastal zone managers. The Action  aim is to form a European-wide research coordination network that integrates expertise in physiological ecology, ecological genomics and conservation-resource management. Uniquely, scientists and managers will work together to close the pure/applied research gap and to develop comprehensive best practices for integrated seagrass habitat management. This is a much talked-about approach that has not been implemented. The European capacities for seagrass research will be integrated to carry out six tasks: establish continuous, in-situ measurement devices for seagrass productivity, establish a modelling and monitoring tool based on seagrass light requirements, understand seagrass responses to global changes, assess seagrass genetic adaptative variation at photosynthetic related loci, evaluate the effectiveness of existing and new seagrass-health ecological indicators and provide guidelines to improve the conservation and management of seagrass dominated ecosystems.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES0906    

 The main objective of this Action  is to develop common protocols and methods within a larger network to reconstruct abrupt and extreme climate change across the full range of European environments (ice, marine and terrestrial) within the period 60,000 to 8000 years ago, bringing together scientists in order to better understand the impact and mechanisms of change, and thereby reducing the uncertainty of future prediction. The main aim of this Action  is to develop common protocols and methods to reconstruct abrupt and extreme climate change across the full range of European environments (ice, marine and terrestrial) over the period 60,000 to 8000 years ago, to better understand the mechanisms and impact of change, and thereby reduce the uncertainty of future prediction. Past climate and environmental data provide critical tests of global and regional climate models. While there are a small number of high profile records, such as the Greenland ice cores, which are critical for informing on the dynamic nature of past climate change, it is at the scale of Europe and the North Atlantic that abrupt climate variability needs to be fully explored. It is crucial that independent records of abrupt climate change across Europe are generated and robustly compared to test for leads/lags in the climate system and the interaction between different climate forcing mechanisms. Doing so will critically underpin our ability to model future climate change and ecosystem response. The main objectives of this Action  are to standardize methodologies across Europe; incorporate reconstructions within climate models; and facilitate interdisciplinary science collaborations, including early-stage and established scientists, to build European research capacity.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES0907    

 This COST Action  aims at coordinating the European studies concerning the oceanographic data exploitation of the European Space Agency Soil Moisture and Ocean Salinity (SMOS) satellite mission. Recently launched in November 2009, SMOS will provide for the first time Sea Surface Salinity (SSS) maps over the oceans. The monitoring of ocean salinity, a variable of renowned importance in the broader scientific context of the climate change analysis, underlines the European relevance of the Action . The overall goal targeted by the network is the synergy of the European efforts in the interpretation of the measurements and their applications, profiting from the imminent availability of SMOS data. This COST Action  will coordinate European teams working on two major research areas. The first one will focus on the improvement and development of SMOS-derived data products. The second will assess the added value of such products in operational oceanography, process and climate studies. This Action  is the ideal framework to capitalize the often fragmented efforts of the identified experts working in these research areas.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1001    

 Due to climate change and shrinking fossil resources, the transition to more and more renewable energy shares is unavoidable. But, as wind and solar energy is strongly dependent on highly variable weather processes, increased penetration rates will also lead to strong fluctuations in the electricity grid which need to be balanced. Proper and specific forecasting of 'energy weather' is a key component for this. Therefore, it is timely to scientifically address the requirements to provide the best possible specific weather information for forecasting the energy production of wind and solar power plants for the next minutes up to several days ahead. Towards such aims, this Action  will have two main lines of activity: first develop dedicated post-processing algorithms coupled with weather prediction models and measurement data especially remote sensing observations; second investigate the difficult relationship between the highly intermittent weather dependent power production and the energy distribution towards end users. The second goal will raise new challenges as this will require from the energy producers and distributors definitions of the requested forecast data and new technologies dedicated to the management of power plants and electricity grids.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1002    

 Marine biodiversity varies over large scales of time and space, and requires a research strategy beyond the tradition/capabilities of classic research. Research that covers these scales requires a permanent international pan-European network of observation stations with an optimized and standardized methodology. In EMBOS the needed large-scale network of research locations in Europe will be installed to assess long-term changes in marine biodiversity and their possible causes taking into account natural and anthropogenic gradients, and EMBOS will extend and optimize this observatory system, including novel interdisciplinary approaches for research. The cooperation leads to a focused and cost effective long term research agenda for EU marine observatories, and contributes to ERA , LIFEWATCH and GEOSS/GEOBON actions, and supports legal obligations of the EU regarding the CBD, OSPAR and Barcelona conventions as well as EU directives (Bird and Habitat Directive, WFD, MSFD, ICZM).       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1003    

 The COST Action  - European framework for online integrated air quality and meteorology modelling (EuMetChem) - will focus on a new generation of online integrated Atmospheric Chemical Transport (ACT) and Meteorology (Numerical Weather Prediction and Climate) modelling with two-way interactions between different atmospheric processes including chemistry (both gases and aerosols), clouds, radiation, boundary layer, emissions, meteorology and climate. At least, two application areas of the integrated modelling are planned to be considered: (i) improved numerical weather prediction (NWP) and chemical weather forecasting (CWF) with short-term feedbacks of aerosols and chemistry on meteorological variables, and (ii) two-way interactions between atmospheric pollution/ composition and climate variability/change. The framework will consist of four working groups namely: 1) Strategy and framework for online integrated modelling; 2) Interactions, parameterisations and feedback mechanisms; 3) Chemical data assimilation in integrated models; and finally 4) Evaluation, validation, and applications. Establishment of such a European framework (involving also key American experts) will enable the EU to develop world class capabilities in integrated ACT/NWP-Climate modelling systems, including research, education and forecasting.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1004    

 The role of solar variability in climate change is a topic of considerable scientific and societal importance, and also a topic of controversy. The mechanisms by which solar variability affects various layers of the terrestrial atmosphere are still poorly known. European teams have developed strong expertise on various aspects, but the lack of interaction has hampered progress toward a more global and quantitative picture. The objective of this Action  is to make solid progress on this problem, by assessing quantitatively the different contributions of solar variability to the terrestrial environment. Four working groups will address respectively the impact of solar radiative forcing, interplanetary perturbations, and energetic particles upon the atmosphere, and the interfacing between upper and lower atmospheric layers and corresponding models. The deliverables include online tools such as a catalogue of proxy data for solar, interplanetary and energetic particle variability, a catalogue of models, best practices for validation, fact sheets for policy makers, and capacity building events for training young researchers. The main benefits will be an authoritative source of information on the role of the Sun in global climate change, a significant enhancement of present knowledge and a long-term structural improvement in the interaction between scientific communities.        Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1005    

 Releases of hazardous agents in complex built environments pose a tremendous challenge to emergency first responders and authorities in charge due to the large number of casualties potentially involved. Air motions in built-up areas are very complex and adequate modelling tools have to be applied properly in order to predict the dispersion of hazardous materials with sufficient accuracy within a very short time. Different types of tools are applied; however, it is not always clear what the advantages and limitations of individual model approaches are. Therefore, it is of exceptional interest to compile a detailed inventory of the different models and methodologies currently in use, to characterize their performance and to establish strategies for their improvement. A consensus on reliable, efficient and suitable model approaches for given local threats and their scientific advancement is imperative. Consequently, the Action  is aiming for a substantial improvement in the implementation of local-scale emergency response tools. By characterizing threat scenarios, compiling dedicated test cases, revealing model limitations and improving model approaches, the Action  is delivering guidance for a reliable application of local-scale emergency response tools. The Action  is a first cross-community initiative to join, to coordinate and to harmonize European efforts in threat assessment and reduction for local-scale airborne hazards.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1006    

 Global biodiversity is declining rapidly, largely as a result of human activities. Effective policy and adaptive management strategies in the face of global change require anticipation of future changes. Mid- to long-term planning will therefore depend, at least in part, on model-based projections. Unlike the well-coordinated climate modelling community, the biodiversity modelling community is currently disparate and largely uncoordinated. Hence, there are no agreed metrics of biodiversity produced as standard output from models, nor are there common datasets used for calibration and validation by modelling efforts. This Action  facilitates the harmonization of current models and datasets of terrestrial, freshwater and marine biodiversity to improve the reliability of future projections of biodiversity change. This cross-community initiative aims to accelerate the development of transparent and scientifically robust biodiversity models, through validation, calibration and intercomparison of models and data, and ultimately to enable environmental decision making based on state-of-the-art projections of biodiversity change under various policy options.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1101    

 Our understanding of global climate change is mainly based on General Circulation Models (GCMs) with a relatively coarse resolution. Since climate change impacts are mainly experienced on regional scales, high-resolution climate change scenarios need to be derived from GCM simulations by downscaling. Validation of downscaling methods is crucial, but several aspects have not been systematically assessed: variability on sub-daily, decadal and longer time-scales, extreme events, spatial variability and inter-variable relationships. Different downscaling approaches such as dynamical downscaling, perfect prog statistical downscaling and model output statistics have not been systematically compared. Furthermore, collaboration between different communities, in particular regional climate modellers, statistical downscalers and statisticians has been limited. VALUE will provide a European network to validate and develop downscaling methods and improve the collaboration between the dispersed research communities and with stakeholders. The Action  will sytematically compare the different downscaling approaches and assess the aspects listed above. VALUE will deliver an assessment of end-user needs, a benchmark data set and pseudo reality for the validation, a set of validation measures, the validation of state-of-the-art methods and guidelines for stakeholders. It will guide the development of improved regional climate change scenarios for Europe and thereby be relevant for European societies and politics.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1102    

 The microbial world is a vast frontier of intrinsic scientific importance and profound practical importance.  The exploration of this frontier has been revolutionised by the introduction of molecular techniques.  However, recent advances have only served to emphasise the enormity of the task before us. The improvements in sequencing technology have enormous implications for those at this frontier. Nevertheless description of this huge resource and the discovery of the rule governing its occurrence transcend the ability of not simply any one research group, but of any one nation.  The purpose of this Action  is to coordinate research groups across Europe to meet this challenge in the belief that if we agree upon common protocols and procedures we will share and pool knowledge to create a whole which is far greater than the sum of the parts.  The Action  will not only seek to document this frontier but to analyse it, to seek patterns, generate hypotheses and to test theories and thus deepen our knowledge. Perhaps most importantly of all, we will be preparing and enabling the next generation of researchers to use the next generation of technologies to ensure that Europe can lead the world in the exploration of this frontier.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1103    

 There is great need to restore existing despoiled drylands and to combat increasing desertification. Restoring habitats improves biodiversity, increases carbon sequestration, enhancing the quality of life for people. An essential measure is the planting of and reestablishment of vegetation. The successful establishment of vegetation in arid areas is complex requiring the multi-disciplinary skills of arid land experts with various capabilities (soils, hydrology, ecology etc.) However, vegetation restoration techniques in arid areas requires review and development. This Action  is required as access to information is acutely limited, disjointed and new techniques are available and not universally tested. This Action  aims to create an Arid Lands Restoration Hub  to provide the science and practical guidance for dryland restoration and combat of desertification through a dynamic and productive international network of initially 29 participants from 15 COST countries and 2 partners from outside Europe. The Action  will deliver an integrated database within a harmonized information hub of current and new methods and techniques of restoration, trials and field studies, assessment indicators, academic and practical publications, and tools to identify and support practical restoration projects and decision makers in planning and restoring drylands and the combat of desertification. The Action  promotes open knowledge, innovation in procedures and methods for improved restoration in dry lands.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1104    

 Toxigenic cyanobacteria are one of the main health risks associated with European water resources. They produce a wide range of potent toxins with adverse health effects on humans and animals exposed to them via drinking water, aquaculture and recreation. European research in the field has generated significant risk management capability, although this is regionally unbalanced. This proposal aims to transfer this knowledge and know-how to all European regions: widening awareness, spreading relevant technical competence, and sharing risk management expertise. The proposal aims to provide tools to end-users (public authorities, water utilities, aquaculture, tourism and recreation sectors) by pooling and coordinating expertise throughout Europe and to harmonize methods and practices across Europe, thereby protecting public health, enterprises and investments. This Action  arrival is extremely timely because new challenges in the field have appeared recently including emerging toxins and cyanobacterial species hitherto unknown in Europe, plus the preparation of new legislation and regulations in some European countries.        Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1105    

 The COST Action  EURO-AGRIWAT will focus on the assessment of water footprint (WF) and virtual water trade (VWT) of key food and no-food agricultural products, including their uncertainties, as well as scenarios concerning WF and VWT under future climatic conditions. The use of advanced tools and data such as remote sensing, updated climatic databases, climatic projections/scenarios and agrometeorological models represents the base of the activity. The use of such instruments will allow a detailed analysis of interactions between crops, climate and management that will be taken into account in the WF assessment. An important component of the Action  will be the preparation and dissemination of recommendations and guidelines for enabling a more efficient water resource management in relation with agricultural activities under climate change and variability. The framework of a COST Action  represents the most suitable way for facing the outstanding and multi-faceted problem of sustainable water use, being characterized by a non-competitive and interdisciplinary environment of high scientific level. These features will allow a collaboration between scientists and stakeholders and the development of common strategies to broaden the available research expertise.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1106    

 Lakes represent important resources within Europe, providing drinking water, hydroelectric power, flood control, recreation and fisheries. Developments in sensor technology now allow high-resolution monitoring of lakes and reservoirs from in-situ platforms, with the data provided to local end-users by web-based technology. The information acquired by these systems is currently reviewed on a site-by-site basis, but an even greater potential lies in the integration of data from many sites into a European network. Barriers to the development of such a network include, for example, a lack of information on the number of sites currently monitored, and the need for standardisation in data collection, processing and quality control. The over-arching objective of NETLAKE is to establish a network of scientists, technologists, managers and stakeholders focused on the development and application of cutting-edge sensor technology for the protection of European lakes and reservoirs. Deliverables will include a meta-database of instrumented sites, case studies on management-relevant topics, data analysis tools, and a citizen science programme to involve local communities in the protection of water resources. The key deliverable, however, will be the establishment of the NETLAKE network itself, bridging communication gaps between researchers, policy makers and managers, and between scientists and local communities.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1201    

 This Action  brings together leading professionals working on complementary areas of wastewater treatment (WWT) at Research Institutions, Industries and Water Agencies from 17 European countries. The Action  will tackle current challenges of WWT, which apart from generating high quality water and sludge, must incorporate issues as resource recovery, energy, odours, greenhouse gases, emerging contaminants, economical efficiency and social acceptance. Thus, the conception of sustainable wastewater treatment plants by 2020 (Water_2020) has to be based on a holistic approach, in which a plant-wide (i.e. including all the inputs and outputs), multi-disciplinary (i.e. with technical, environmental, social and economical considerations) and flexible (i.e. depending on the geographical and socio-economic situation) perspective is included. Research in the water sector is quite fragmented, with scientist working on specific disciplines, and innovation in many countries is hindered due to lack of initiative or confidence. COST Action  offers the perfect framework to overcome these barriers by creating a network in which excellent water professionals from different stakeholders and disciplines will cooperate and exchange knowledge. Annual workshops, semi-annual meetings, training schools, a discussion platform and short-term scientific missions will be used as instruments for reaching this effective network. The main deliverables that will be obtained include a book produced by reputable publishers with clear guidance for Water_2020, as well as a Decision Support System for the selection of the best alternatives for each specific economic, legal and social requirement. COST Action  will allow setting up a strong European network, including Early-Stage Researchers ( ESR ), whose results will be disseminated to the scientific community, water industry, policy makers and society, as the issues implies environmental (water and air pollution), economic (reduce operational costs through resource recovery and energetic self-sufficiency) and social (safer water) concerns.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1202    

 Treeline ecosystems are important indicators of environmental change, because they are heavily impacted by environmental drivers, in particular changed climate and land use, resulting in land abandonment and reforestation of formerly treeless areas. With a focus on treeline ecosystems, this Action  aims at integrating scientific methods and results related to the  biodiversity conservation and sustainable use of natural resources under climate and land use change. The Action  will investigate the drivers and extent of contemporary and future environmental changes in European mountain forests, developing methods for estimating their resilience and define consequences for society. This knowledge provides the scientific basis necessarily to develop and adjust management strategies together with local and regional stakeholders as well as policy recommendations for national and European policy makers. Applying the DPSIR (Drivers, Pressures, State, Impact, Response) framework, the joint actions of the SENSFOR network will contribute to the development of strategies for preserving ecosystem services and biodiversity conservation in sensitive mountain areas in Europe.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1203    

 LoNNe aims to improve knowledge of the multiple effects of increasing artificial illumination worldwide. Innovations in technology and policy are urgently required to address the impact of artificial lighting on the natural environment, biodiversity, ecosystems, human health and society, and to identify potential corrective measures. Until now, the overwhelming focus for improvements in illumination technology has been with regard to energy and luminous efficiency. Existing research associated with the impact of artificial lighting on various aspects of our environment and lives is fragmented, and generally at best at a regional or national level. The current potential for networking to enhance mobility between different actors from science, health care, public authorities and industry is limited. LoNNe aims at a cooperation of these players in order to cross-fertilize skills, and to create standard operating procedures. The COST Action  will be open to any field of research, with the explicit goals of influencing the development path of modern lighting technology, and creating guidelines for lighting concepts that are ecologically, socially, and economically sustainable.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1204    

 Concerning the transfer of E ngineered N anomaterials from wastewater T reatment  stormwat E r to R ivers (ENTER) the following issues require clarification: (i) which and (ii) what amounts of Engineered NanoMaterials (ENMs) are released, (iii) how persistent are they and (iv) to what extent do they cause in situ  toxicity? Reasons for knowledge gaps are a lack of suitable analytical methods, insufficient databases on usage and release, and the absence of comprehensive monitoring networks. ENTER will help to advance scientific knowledge on release and fate of ENMs in the urban water cycle and to communicate expert knowledge in an appropriate manner to the non-scientific community. ENTER will break down barriers between scientific and public pressure groups by an intensified scientific exchange via, e.g., the position papers. The ENTER products are needed to improve the decision-making process by supporting end users such as politicians, the EU and national public servants. ENTER will clearly aid to advance the understanding on the transport and transformation processes of ENMs released to the urban wastewater systems and to understand the transfer of ENMs to the aquatic environment. This Action  will improve the collaboration between scientists and the public by striking a new path towards an efficient knowledge exchange.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1205    

 Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS) have revolutionised positioning, navigation, and timing, becoming a common part of our everyday life. Aside from these well-known civilian and commercial applications, GNSS is now an established atmospheric observing system which can accurately sense water vapour, the most abundant greenhouse gas, accounting for 60-70% of atmospheric warming. Severe weather forecasting is challenging, in part due to the high temporal and spatial variation of atmospheric water vapour. Water vapour is under-sampled in the current meteorological and climate observing systems, obtaining and exploiting more high-quality humidity observations is essential to weather forecasting and climate monitoring. This Action  will address new and improved capabilities from concurrent developments in both the GNSS and meteorological communities. For the first time, the synergy of the three GNSS systems (GPS, GLONASS and Galileo) will be used to develop new, advanced tropospheric products, exploiting the full potential of multi-GNSS water vapour estimates on a wide range of temporal and spatial scales, from real-time monitoring and forecasting of severe weather, to climate research. In addition the action will promote the use of meteorological data in GNSS positioning, navigation, and timing services. The Action  will stimulate knowledge transfer and data sharing throughout Europe.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1206    

 This proposal will coordinate Brewer Spectrophotometer measurements of ozone, spectral UV and aerosol optical depth (AOD) in the UV within Europe, and unite the ozone, UV and AOD communities, through a formally managed European Brewer Network capable of delivering a consistent, spatially homogeneous European data resource, significant for the World Meteorological Organisation (WMO), the World Ozone and UV Data Centre (WOUDC), the International Ozone Commission (IO3C), the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Global Monitoring for Environment and Security (GMES) and the ozone trend assessment panels. Around 50 Brewer Spectrophotometers are deployed in Europe, independently funded by national agencies, each duplicating effort to achieve separately best practice and accuracy. A COST Action  is the ideal mechanism to remove this disparity, establish knowledge exchange and training, and open up a route to links with international agencies and other networks globally.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1207    

 The recent occurrence of large earthquakes and discovery of deep fluid seepage calls for a revision of the postulated hydrogeological inactivity and low seismic activity of old oceanic transform-type plate boundaries. Both processes are intrinsically associated. This Action  seeks to merge the expertise of a large number of research groups and support the development of multidisciplinary knowledge on how seep fluid (bio)chemistry relates to seismicity. It aims to identify (bio)geochemical proxies for the detection of precursory seismic signals and to develop innovative physico-chemical sensors for deep-ocean seismogenic faults. National efforts will be coordinated through Working Groups (WGs) focused on 1) geophysical and (bio)geochemical data acquisition; 2) modelling of structure and seismicity of faults; 3) engineering of deep-ocean physico-chemical seismic sensors and 4) integration and dissemination. Study areas include the Azores-Gibraltar Fracture Zone and the North Anatolian Fault which have generated some of the most devastating earthquakes in Europe.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1301    

 A challenging area of anaerobic digestion (AD) research remains largely unchartered with respect to understanding the role of trace metals (TMs) in enabling biogas production. This major knowledge gap and scientific challenge is a multifaceted problem involving metal chemistry, physical interactions of metal and solids, microbiology and technology optimisation. Moreover, the fate of TMs, and the chemical speciation and transport of TMs, in environments - often agricultural lands - receiving discharge waters from AD is completely unknown. The Action  aims to grow a critical mass of stakeholders interested in understanding trace metal bioavailability and microbial interactions in anaerobic environments and soils. Five working groups (i.e. Chemical speciation and bioavailability; Microbiology; Engineering; Fate of TMs in the environment; and Modeling) are defined, where cooperation between, and integration of, the working groups will be emphasized. The COST Action  will allow the establishment of a strong European network, including Early-Stage Researchers. The problem has major environmental, economic and social significance, and the network will disseminate findings to the scientific community, water industry, policy makers and the rest of society.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1302    

 The new generation of high-resolution (1km) weather forecast models now operational over Europe promises to revolutionise predictions of severe weather and poor air quality. To realise this promise, a dense observing network is required, focusing especially on the lowest few km of the atmosphere, so that forecast models have the most realistic state of the atmosphere for initialisation, continuous assimilation and verification. This Action  will focus on developing three instruments available throughout Europe: i) Several hundreds of ceilometers providing backscatter profiles of aerosol and cloud properties with 30m vertical resolution every minute, ii) more than 20 Doppler lidars, a new technology, providing vertical and horizontal winds in the lower atmosphere with a resolution of 30m every 5 minutes, and iii) About 30 microwave profilers giving profiles of temperature and humidity in the lowest few km every 10 minutes. These instruments are relatively inexpensive and have proven suitable for unmanned network operations. Current and recent COST and FP7  projects have considered the profiling ability of advanced lidars and radars, but none has specifically addressed these three instruments.  In collaboration with Numerical Weather Prediction centres, the action will lead towards operational networking of these existing but so far under-exploited, instruments.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1303    

 The rose-ringed parakeet is listed amongst the top 100 worst alien species in Europe, and since the 1970s has rapidly established itself in over 100 cities across the continent and beyond. They have begun to pose problems in urban and rural areas such as disturbance to humans (including potential to transmit diseases to livestock and humans), competition with native wildlife and, increasingly, as an agricultural pest, already prompting changes in national policies. Worryingly, farming practices that adapt to global climate change and a warmer Europe facilitate the continued expansion of parakeet populations, amplifying the problems parakeets pose for European agro-economy. More generally, a temporal, spatial and social perspective of biological invasion is crucial to address, understand and solve the alien species problem  but is lacking. This Action  will help to (i) better understand why some species such as parakeets are highly successful invaders, (ii) harmonise methodologies to predict agricultural, economic, societal and ecological impacts across Europe, and the means to mitigate them, (iii) create a virtual European Monitoring Centre for all invasive parrot species, and (iv) transfer results to policy and society. The Action  fulfils EU 2020 Biodiversity Strategy, Convention on Biological Diversity and Syracuse Charter recommendations on invasive species.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1304    

 Animal movement, and especially animal migration, is of great scientific and practical importance, and wide public appeal.  The aerial movement of billions of organisms through Europe each spring and autumn brings enormous benefits in terms of ecosystem services, but also poses great risks through air-traffic collisions, invasions of crop pests and spread of disease. In our rapidly changing world it is vitally important that the timing, intensity and spatial distribution of these movements are monitored and the factors that drive these patterns understood. Patterns of bird, bat and especially insect migration are strongly influenced by atmospheric conditions, and the main research tool for studying large-scale aerial movements is radar. The objective of this Action  is to foster an essential international and multi-disciplinary approach by establishing a European network of radar biologists, meteorologists and engineers, which will coordinate existing monitoring efforts and prediction of animal movement patterns, extend these to a continental scale, and improve weather radar products for meteorological applications. Researchers from across Europe and a wide range of expertise, including ecology, biogeography, ornithology, entomology, meteorology, mathematics and engineering, will join forces in the field of aeroecology to foster continental-scale remote sensing of animal migration for the first time.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1305    

 Successful prediction of pathways of storm runoff generation and associated soil erosion is of considerable societal importance, including off-site impacts such as water quality and the provision of related ecosystem services. Recently, the role of connectivity in controlling runoff and erosion has received significant and increasing scientific attention, though in a disparate and uncoordinated way.  There is a wealth of experience and expertise in connectivity across Europe that could be harnessed to ensure that the potential already demonstrated in key studies can be more widely fulfilled; to move forward along agreed lines and identify emerging goals, and to benefit from cross-fertilization of ideas from the fields of Hydrology, Soil Science, Geomorphology and Ecology. COST is the appropriate vehicle for funding this activity because it will gather together existing expertise to advance the field of connectivity in a concerted way. The key benefit of this Action  will therefore be to establish connectivity as a research paradigm. The Action  will then permit transfer of current understanding into useable science, by developing it s conceptual basis and transferring it into a series of monitoring and modelling tools that will provide the platform for indices that will inform holistic management of catchment systems.        Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1306    

 Sewage contains the excreted biomarkers of endogenous human metabolism that directly reflects the exposure and stressors placed upon an entire contributing community. The quantitative measurement of these specific biomarkers in sewage from communities allows the averaged patterns of factors related to lifestyle, disease and environment to be used for the assessment of community health. The Action  will develop and expand an existing pan-European inter-disciplinary network, bringing together experts from relevant disciplines interested in the application and development of using the quantitative measurement of human biomarkers in sewage to evaluate lifestyle, health and exposure at the community level. In order to achieve its objectives the Action  will manage a common Europe-wide testing platform that will develop best practice, provide a significant increase in the comparable spatio-temporal resolution of available data, coordinate the development of new biomarkers in sewage with focus on new psychoactive substances and new biomarkers for the community assessment of factors such as environment, health, lifestyle and diet, and integrate sewage-based approaches with other available metrics. The Action  will have a major impact on the development of this emerging field and ensure that the technology is used in a responsible and effective manner and its potentially fully exploited in collaboration with end-users.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1307    

 Many climate change manipulation experiments have been carried out in recent decades. However, several challenges still exist or have emerged which limit our understanding of ecosystem functioning under future climate change. These include inadequate representation of biomes, artifacts, incomparable experiments, poor representation of relevant scenarios, in particular extreme events, lack of research communication sharing of results and lack of good data for modeling. This Action  will develop a network for the experimental climate change research community brining experimentalists and modelers together in order to provide solutions to these recurrent challenges. The Action  will organise workshops addressing key challenges in climate change experiments and modeling, support research exchange, educate young scientists and facilitate better sharing and access to experimental data. The Action  will be organised within four Working Groups to address: Experimental best practice Natural climate gradients as experimental proxies Data sharing Data-model interaction The Action  will provide added value to European climate change research by linking high level national research groups and projects to a supra-national level and provide strong links and interactions with the global research community.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1308    

 Important European and international initiatives (SPECNET, BIOSPEC and COST Action  ES0903) explored the use of proximal optical sensing of  ecosystem where carbon and water vapor flux is estimated by eddy covariance techniques. Such optical observations provide data at the  high spectral, temporal and spatial resolutions necessary to more fully  comprehend the links between light use, plant physiology and ecosystem  functioning and provide key validation datasets for satellite remote sensing, such as the Sentinel missions, and the flux communities. The recent  advances in UAV platforms and optical sensors provide unprecedented  opportunities for high spatial, spectral and multi-angular near-ground  Earth observations. This will enable scientists to answer ecological and physiological questions at multiple scales through integrated empirical  and modeling methods. Important progress is also being made in remote  sensing of steady-state fluorescence, the most direct proxy for  photosynthesis. The FLuorescence EXplorer (FLEX) mission, selected for further studies, will also benefit as this Action  will support FLEX  validation and calibrations campaigns. Furthermore, scientists have  recognized the need to develop a 'smart' on-line platform to process and analyses optical data along with biophysical and water/carbon flux measurements and share these with other scientific communities and stakeholders which will also be addressed in this Action .       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1309    

 Seismology is undergoing a revolution, as it is starting to use the full-length records of seismic events and background ambient noise to go beyond still-life snapshots of the interior of the Earth, and look into time-dependent changes of its properties. Data availability has grown dramatically with the expansion of seismographic networks and data centers, so as to enable much more detailed and accurate analyses. The Action  aims at structuring the EU seismological community to enable development of data-intensive, time-dependent techniques for monitoring Earth active processes (e.g., earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, landslides, glacial earthquakes) as well as oil/gas reservoirs. TIDES will network European laboratories in Academia and Industry with complementary skills and will organize a series of workshops and advanced schools to train the next generation of scientists. TIDES will facilitate the exploitation of massive data sets collected by European observational infrastructures - coordinated through the ESFRI EPOS - through the use of high-performance computing facilities. TIDES will strengthen Europe's role in a critical field for natural hazards and natural resource management.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1401    

  The oceans have the largest heat capacity in the climate system, therefore controlling the rate of climate change. Ocean circulation redistributes heat, and variability in that circulation determines seasonal to decadal variability in climate. Syntheses of the ocean state using models constrained by observations are critical for understanding climate and predicting climate variability. However, there has been little organised activity evaluating them. Clear information is needed about the strengths and weaknesses of ocean syntheses, as well as guidelines on how fit for different purposes various ocean syntheses are. Recent improvements on Earth observation systems, like the completion of the Argo global float network and the ESA  projects on Essential Climate Variables, provide new datasets that can improve the quality of ocean syntheses, allowing ocean variability to be characterised more accurately. The main goals of this Action  are to improve the coordination of the European efforts in the evaluation of ocean syntheses, to optimize their use and value, to ease their access, to promote their improvement and to raise confidence in their quality. Recommendations and guidelines will be provided on the evaluation, quality and applications of ocean syntheses to end users. These evaluations require cross-disciplinary meetings with experts in Earth Observation, ocean and atmosphere syntheses, air-sea flux measurements and modelling and physical oceanography. This Action  will provide the optimal framework for integrating these communities.        Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1402    

 Wastewater reuse is currently considered globally as the most critical element of sustainable water management. Water scarcity, foreseen to aggravate, pushes for maximum utilization of non-conventional water. Although reuse is accompanied by a number of benefits, several potential drawbacks still puzzle scientists. The applied treatments fail to completely remove microcontaminants, antibiotic-resistant bacteria and/or their genes (ARB Gs). Knowledge on the actual effects of reuse with regard to these aspects is currently not consolidated. This Action  will answer critical questions through a European multidisciplinary network, structured in interactive Working Groups (WGs), to achieve: a) identification of the microbiome and mobile antibiotic resistome in treated wastewater, b) assessment of the potential for uptake/transmission of microcontaminants and ARB Gs in crops, c) determination of effect-based bioassays required for wastewater reuse, d) identification of efficient/economically viable technologies able to meet the current challenges and, e) development of a relevant risk assessment and policy framework. The Action  will establish criteria on technologies/assessment methods for wastewater treatment and suggest new effluent quality criteria to overcome current barriers and safeguard the reuse practice. The Action  will have a major impact on the enhancement of sustainable wastewater reuse in light of current challenges at technological, economical and societal level.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1403    

 Snow cover is an essential climate variable directly affecting the Earth energy balance. Snow cover has a number of important physical properties that exert an influence on global and regional energy, water and carbon cycles. Its quantification in a changing climate is thus important for various environmental and economic impact assessments. Proper description and assimilation of snow cover information into hydrological, land surface, meteorological and climate models are critical to address the impact of snow on various phenomena, to predict local snow water resources and to warn about snow-related natural hazards. This induces a challenging problem of bridging information from micro-structural scales of the snowpack up to the grid resolution in models. European research teams have developed different snow measurement practices, instrumentation, algorithms and data assimilation techniques customised to their purposes. However, they lack harmonised approaches, validation and methodologies. The Action  will co-ordinate efforts to address these issues, through establishing harmonized monitoring practices, enhancing the use of observations by promoting new observing strategies, bringing together different communities, facilitating data transfer, upgrading and enlarging knowledge through networking, exchange and training, and linking them to activities in international agencies and global networks.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1404    

 Gas hydrate accumulations in continental shelf sediments are considered a promising resource for future gas supply by several non-COST countries (e.g. USA, Japan, China, India, South Korea, and Taiwan). In 2013, the Research Consortium for Methane Hydrate Resources in Japan (MH21) produced gas during a successful offshore field test. In Europe, as elsewhere, demand for natural gas is continuously increasing. This COST Action  is designed to integrate the expertise of a large number of European research groups and industrial players to promote the development of multidisciplinary knowledge on the potential of gas hydrates as an economically feasible and environmentally sound energy resource. In particular, MIGRATE aims to determine the European potential inventory of exploitable gas hydrates, to assess current technologies for their production, and to evaluate the associated risks. National efforts will be coordinated through Working Groups focusing on 1) resource assessment, 2) exploration, production, and monitoring technologies, 3) environmental challenges, 4) integration, public perception, and dissemination. Study areas will span the European continental margins, including the Black Sea, the Nordic Seas, the Mediterranean Sea and the Atlantic Ocean.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1405    

 Soil is a non-renewable ecosystem resource under seriously pressure by land use, urbanisation and climate change. Soil organic matter (SOM) is key to soil fertility, climate change mitigation, combatting land degradation, and the conservation of above- and below-ground biodiversity and associated ecosystem services. Existing models of SOM dynamics are defined mostly in terms of plant residues input and microbial decomposition, overlooking the important contribution of soil fauna activity. Here, we bring biogeochemists and soil ecologists together to develop a research network for improved SOM models by implementing the role of the soil fauna as a basis for sustainable soil management. An international interdisciplinary approach within a COST Action  is envisaged as the proper platform for both experimentalists and modellers to provide solutions. Deliverables will be provided through workshops addressing key challenges in SOM / soil fauna experimentation and modelling, support of research exchange, education of young scientists and better access to experimental data. The Action  will be organised within four Working Groups to address: 1. Knowledge gap analysis of SOM   soil fauna interaction; 2. Potentials and limitations for inclusion of soil fauna effects in SOM modelling; 3. Data assemblage and data sharing; 4. Knowledge management and advocacy training;       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1406    

 Critical metals (CM) which include rare earth metals (REM) are essential and important for the production of electrical and electronic equipment. An increasing demand for green and information technology products could lead to a scarcity of these resources in future and a dependency on a very few supply countries. Currently the extraction of CM from ores is energy intensive and involves environmental risks due to the toxic chemicals involved. An alternative source for CM is Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE). Through the currently applied recycling processes of this complex waste stream REM are lost completely. Moreover, inadequate recycling approaches in developing countries are causing severe sanitary and environmental damages. Hence, it is essential to develop effective and ecologically sound systems, including concerted collection, pre-treatment and refining processes for an utmost efficient recovery. Due to these manifold challenges the recovery of CM from WEEE cannot be solved on a national level. Experts from all process phases should create an interdisciplinary, transnational alliance in the pan-European context. Against this background the proposed COST Action  ReCreew aims to create a European network for innovative CM recovery in order to support the supply of European industries while reducing environmental hazards on global scale.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1407    

 Fossil fuel covers the majority of our energetic and chemical needs. However, fossil fuels are limited and the petrochemical industry has a negative impact on the environment. Biomass, as a renewable source, is attracting worldwide attention to satisfy this demand in the so-called bioeconomy. Conventional biomass feedstocks remain controversial due to the limited land availability and competition with food and feed production. Microalgae represent a promising alternative renewable source since they can be cultivated on non-arable land. Furthermore, microalgae remove and recycle nutrients from wastewater and flue-gases, thus providing additional environmental benefits. Investigating the production of non-fuel products could play a major role in turning economic and energy balances more favorable. Microalgae offer interesting applications in the nutrition field being high in antioxidants, pigments, polyunsaturated fatty acids and proteins. This COST Action  proposes the establishment of a European network sharing a common goal: development of an economical feasible model for the commercialization of algae-based bioproducts. EUALGAE is created to stimulate not only interaction among research groups across Europe but also to foster cooperation between academia and industry. This scientific platform will generate a synergistic approach for utilization of microalgae biomass for sustainable fuels and fine chemical products.       Earth System Science and  Environmental Management COST Action ES1408    

 Most of the European marine fish resources are overexploited. Despite the technical measures implemented, many depleted stocks have failed to recover. There is increasing awareness that the traditional indicators of stock viability are inadequate because the capacity of the population to annually produce viable eggs and larvae is extremely important for stock viability and recovery. In addition, egg production is also influenced by ambient environmental conditions, the exact effects of which are still not quantified. Currently there are a number of research projects specifically examining the linkages between fish reproductive success and the subsequent population dynamics. In addition to these projects there is a need for increased cooperation between researchers, standardisation and cross calibration of the different protocols being used, enhanced exchange of ideas, demonstration of the latest advances and the creation of a common research platform that can provide fisheries managers with realistic tools for fish stock recovery.  The main objective of the Action  is to establish a network of researchers to co-operate on the improvement of knowledge on fish reproduction in relation to fisheries and the enhancement of the current assessment methodology in order to promote sustainable exploitation of marine fish resources. Keywords : Fisheries management, Fisheries assessment, Fish reproduction, reproductive potential, stock recovery.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA0601    

 Good functional mitochondria are essential for a healthy organism and dysfunction leads to disease. The performance of mitochondria can be influenced by diet and dietary components. This provides opportunities for the improvement of human health and represents development opportunities for the food industry and science. Despite its importance world-wide, research in this area is extremely limited. This COST action will set up a structure to bring the mitochondrial research community and the nutrition research community together and build an integrated European research community aimed at understanding the interdependency between bioactive food components and mitochondrial function. Better understanding of this interaction may lead to important economic and social benefits by improving health, boosting industrial innovation and sustaining European competitiveness in this field. Keywords : - Bioactive food components: Vitamins; micronutrients; bioactives; polyphenols; fatty acids; carbohydrates, amino acids, peptides - Mitochondrial function: Mitochondria; apoptosis; energy metabolism; ROS (reactive oxygen species); cell dynamics; signaling; nutrient sensing - Health: Health promotion; disease prevention; increasing resistance; healthy aging - Methodology: Nutrition; functional genomics; human and animal physiology; molecular cell biology       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA0602    

 Plants, as all other living organisms depend on proteins to perform most of their vital functions. The name protein comes from the Greek   ("prota"), meaning "of primary importance". Proteins are the functional molecules that drive metabolic and regulatory pathways in a cell. Proteomics, i.e. the large-scale analysis of proteins in biological systems at a certain time point, aims to identify all proteins present and to characterize their qualitative and quantitative modifications, for example in response to environmental changes. Proteomics is a relatively recent technology currently undergoing fast development and growth, logically complementing the genomic and transcriptomic studies as well as the other emerging field of metabolomics. Although protocols have been developed to perform proteomic analysis in the human, animal and microbial domains of life, the plant kingdom still awaits a systematic approach for proteome analysis. This proposal aims to build up expertise in plant proteomics through an integrated network of European scientists. Tools for proteome analysis in fundamental and applied plant research areas will be developed and shared, to generate fundamental information about plant metabolism, investigate responses to environmental constraints and assess food quality. This proposal will also increase public understanding for new technologies, critical for further development by the industry. Keywords : Mass spectrometry, Post-translational modifications, Protein-protein interactions, Plant proteome, Systems biology       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA0603    

 Europe faces the challenge of delivering safe, high-quality, and health-promoting food and feed as well as bio-products in an economical, environmentally sensitive, and sustainable manner across environments that face climatic change and increasing abiotic and biotic stresses. Triticeae cereals (wheat, barley, rye) are essential in human and domestic animal nutrition and are arguably the most important crops for European agriculture. Existing germplasm resources and current breeding methods alone are insufficient for understanding the mechanisms underlying important traits and for catalysing a quantum leap in yield, sustainability and quality improvement. Major advances in crops will require a broad suite of direct genomics approaches, built on relevant data from model plants (rice, Brachypodium ). Such a strategy is massively complex and can only be carried out efficiently at the international level. We propose a COST Action  to coordinate, focus and strengthen national and pan-European Triticeae genomics and to address infrastructure disparities. The four Working Groups will arrange workshops, Short Term Scientific Missions, a website, and joint databases and publications. Keywords: Harvest Quality and Yield Stability, Genetic Resources and Diversity, Structural, Comparative, and Functional Genomics, Biotic and Abiotic Stress Resistance, Molecular Breeding Tools       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA0604    

 Unravelling signalling steps and metabolic pathways controlling abiotic stress tolerance of plants, provides essential tools for coping with the accumulating negative effects of climate changes in breeding, agriculture and environmental protection. Improvement of efficacy of plant stress tolerance is essential for successful combating salinization, frost damage and desertification in European and also in other non-COST participating countries. Drought, salt and cold tolerance traits of crops are controlled by biological regulatory mechanisms governing the production of highly effective stress-protecting metabolites, including polyamines and proline. The major goal of this COST proposal was to stimulate cutting-edge collaborative research towards understanding the regulatory mechanisms of abiotic stress signalling pathways leading to the production of major stress-protective plant compounds. By stimulating scientific exchange among molecular geneticists, biochemists, plant physiologists and breeders, the network program aims at the identification of key regulators of plant abiotic stress responses and their essential stress-protective end-targets. Keywords : Abiotic stress, plants, signalling pathways, signalling components, transcription factors, osmo-protectants, polyamines       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA0605    

 Pest and disease management poses significant challenges for the medical and agricultural communities. In addition, public concern over pesticide use and more stringent environmental regulations creates the need for new technologies. Bacterial symbiosis is prevalent in arthropods that can be devastating pests and efficient disease vectors. One new approach to control arthropod pest populations or to reduce vector competence is by symbiont-based control strategies (SCS) that are environmentally friendly and may replace chemical control methods. Research on symbiosis is an interdisciplinary subject requiring methods and protocols from various fields. It is therefore essential to coordinate the actions of EU groups working on symbiosis. To achieve this goal, the Action  propose to establish a COST network which will bring together all European leading teams in this field. The network will cooperate in the form of five working groups (WGs): Arthropod Symbiont Diversity (WG1), Arthropod-Symbiont Metagenomes (WG2), Host-Symbiont Interactions (WG3), Symbiont-Based Control Strategies (WG4) and Ethical, Regulatory and Commercial Aspects of SCS (WG5). The initiative will be managed in a way that will insure maximum interactions and its successful implementation will put the EU at the forefront of both basic and applied research in the area of arthropod symbiosis. Keywords: symbiosis, arthropod symbiont diversity, arthropod pests and disease vectors, symbiont-based control strategies, metagenomics.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA0701    

 The main objective of the Action  was to establish a network of European researchers working on different aspects of maternal interaction with gametes and embryo in different species to advance towards creation of a so called Interactome map of cell-to-cell interactions as well as endo- and paracrine interactions between gametes, embryos and female reproductive tract during different stages of reproductive cycle and pregnancy at health and under disturbed maternal nutrition and metabolism. Mechanisms of interactions of gametes or embryos with their maternal environment are important biological filters limiting reproductive success, both in livestock and the human. Although several aspects of the gamete/embryo-maternal interactome have been studied, there is so far no systematic analysis of this biological module. Such an ambitious task can obviously not be fulfilled by an individual laboratory or discipline. Thus the present COST Action  aimed at joining laboratories from European member states with excellent expertise in the fields of reproductive biology and biotechnology with state-of-the-art technology and methods in transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics and systems biology. The Action  intended to promote capacity-building of young researchers in this growing field by providing opportunities for further development and education via providing focused, inter-disciplinary workshops, an inter-disciplinary training school and the creation of working groups for different lines of research among the components of the consortium. This novel approach will further strengthen the already leading position of Europe in the field of reproductive biology and animal production. Knowledge of the gametes/embryo-maternal interactome will facilitate novel approaches for improving the efficiency and safety of assisted reproduction techniques.Further novel molecular markers of fertility will help to improve the fertility of livestock population by genomic selection and thus provide unique competitive advantages to the European animal breeding industry. Finally, this knowledge has cross-disciplinary applications in human health and of immense importance for future public health in European countries. Keywords: Animals, Gametes, Embryo, Maternal communication, Systems Biology       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA0702    

 Sustainable growth of the European aquaculture industry requires an improved knowledge basis that allows a predictable supply of high quality juvenile fish for the grow-out phase and up to the consumers' standards. Relatively low survival rates and sub-optimal quality are largely attributed to uncontrolled problems during larval rearing, and lack of tools for early prediction of larval phenotype and quality. There are over 100 universities, colleges and research institutions in Europe involved in aquaculture, as well as an equal number of research institutions. Currently the European aquaculture industry produces about 1.3 million tonnes of fish, equal to one third of the EU fishery value. The aim of this COST Action  was to contribute to the scientific knowledge basis as to support a sustainable development of aquaculture. This required identifying critical success factors and gaps in knowledge in order to overcome the present limiting predictable mass supply of quality juveniles. The multidisciplinary network of researchers and producers intended to achieve this through integration of knowledge obtained in national and European research projects and practical experience. This Action  contributed to a better understanding of fish larval physiology, identify quality and performance predictors for larval-juvenile production and enhance a rapid development of improved production protocols and hatchery management procedures. Keywords: juveniles production for aquaculture, fish larvae, nutrition, disease control, quality indices       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA0801    

 As in human nutrition, concepts in animal nutrition are changing. Optimal nutrition is now considered fundamental whereas in the past adequate nutrition was considered sufficient. Optimal nutrition implies that feeds must be considered not only in terms of their nutritional properties but also in terms of their ability to promote health and protect against disease. The health of the animal is fundamental in determining the quality, safety and wholesomeness of foods of animal origin for human consumption. This COST Action  creates a research network concerned with: the role of animal nutrition in improving animal health; the role of animal nutrition in designing functional foods for humans; and the development of the concepts of feed safety, feed quality and feed functionality, as counterparts of these ideas as they are currently applied foods for humans. The main task of the network will be to promote the acquisition and facilitate the dissemination of knowledge in these areas and encourage cooperation between various groups working in the area. Keywords: Feed, food, health, safety, functional food, functional feed       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA0802    

 In Europe, China and the USA, beekeepers are being regularly confronted with severe inexplicable and sudden colony losses (Euro 400 million per year, excluding pollination value), with colonies exhibiting diverse symptoms (CCD = Colony Collapse Disorder). This major pollinator decline may lead to even more serious economic and ecological consequences than already experienced (severe pollination deficits in major crops) because beekeepers and veterinary authorities are unaware of the underlying factors and cannot implement effective mitigating measures. Efforts by individual countries to reveal the drivers of colony losses are doomed due to the high number of interacting factors. An international COST network is urgently required. COLOSS will identify the factors at the individual honeybee and colony levels causing severe colony losses and investigate synergistic effects between them. This will enable the development and dissemination of emergency measures and sustainable management strategies to prevent large scale losses. For this purpose, leading scientists, beekeepers and industry from  COST countries and some non-COST countries, will collaborate with complementary approaches, thereby providing the crucial R D link for the success of this Action . This worldwide integrated approach will mitigate the detrimental impact of honeybee colony losses for beekeepers, agriculture and natural biodiversity. Keywords: colony losses, honeybee, environment, pathogens, vitality       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA0803    

 Proof-of-principle for Molecular Farming (MF) has been established over the last 15 years through sustained efforts of a growing number of European research groups. This work has been supported by the strategic decision of the EU to fund several initiatives through FPs 4-6 resulting in an impressive volume of generated knowledge. The aim of the Action  is to leverage fruits of earlier EU, national and industrial investments in Molecular Farming to reach the next level, i.e. to move from R D to applications, to develop product-oriented platforms, to enable new classes of products, to lower the costs and ultimately to commercialize the products. This Action  will create new opportunities for European agriculture, horticulture and related technology sectors as the plants dedicated to Molecular Farming constitute new high-value crops. The Action  brings the key players together and will increase European momentum, capacity and infrastructure. It will also expand activities to countries that have not thus far been able to participate, including developing countries. The concrete outcome will be a sustainable European Molecular Farming community with a clear vision, and links and input into scientific, regulatory, biosafety, intellectual property (IP), dissemination and public engagement activities. Keywords: Plant-made recombinant proteins, Scale-up and downstream processing, Contained growth or in-field production, Path to commercialization, Intellectual Property Rights, regulatory framework and biosafety       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA0804    

 The main objective of the Action  was to advance our knowledge on various aspects of goats  parasitology and health management towards a better understanding of the different components explaining the specificities of goat-parasite interactions as well as to develop sustainable strategies to control parasitic diseases in goats.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA0805    

 The main objective of this Action  was to strengthen existing networks in order to develop suitable, efficient and cost-effective methods for reactive and proactive response to viral diseases of plants for a sustainable agriculture. Specific primary objectives of this Action  were: 1. Co-ordinate frontier European research on plant virus control through gene silencing approaches. 2. Help develop novel non-transgenic control strategies for managing plant viral diseases in Europe. 3. Optimize protocols for high-throughput production and delivery of suitable resistance inducer molecules. 4. Transfer innovations to end-user groups (i.e. SMEs, plant protection organizations, growers  groups). 5. Disseminate results via publication of all meeting proceedings, developing a web site with bibliography and announcements for long-term networking.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA0806    

 The main objective of this Action  was the enhancement and exchange of scientific knowledge and technologies related to phytoplasma diseases, through the establishment of a multidisciplinary scientific European Network, aimed at developing strategies to detect and prevent biological invasion, and the spread of phytoplasma diseases of plants.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA0807    

 The main objective of the Action  is to collate existing knowledge of halophytes from gene function to ecosystems that will impact on conservation and management of saline environments and agricultural productions. The growing human population presents a huge challenge to world agriculture. As more than 40% of the Earth is arid or semi-arid and most of the planet's water is saline, we advocate the sustainable use of these under-exploited resources for human benefit. Halophytes have evolved in saline habitats and are an untapped source of food, fibre and bioenergy. Deepening our understanding of halophytes and saline ecosystems will help combat salinisation, soil erosion, loss of biodiversity and bioproductivity. Our goal is to create an interdisciplinary group of scientists to bridge gaps between disciplines by jointly exploring the biodiversity of halophytes, re-evaluating their uses as crops, including bioenergy, as sources of salt-resistance genes and for use in the restoration and rehabilitation of salinized or contaminated land. The Action  will tackle the problems of salt-affected agricultural land and support the timely development of a saline agriculture using brackish water as a replacement or a supplement for diminishing freshwater.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA0901    

 The main objective of the Action  is to improve knowledge on porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome (PRRS) in Europe in order to identify effective strategies to combat it. Twenty years after its emergence, porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome (PRRS) is still having major impacts on pig health and welfare. The etiologic agent is the PRRS virus. PRRS remains a challenge to the sustainability of pig production, especially with the emergence of new highly pathogenic PRRSV strains. To date, European PRRS research programs have been fragmented. The objectives of the Action  are to generate specific outcomes such as the identification of key challenges and propose potential solutions to problems to increase progress and facilitate the use of new technologies in animal health. With a specific emphasise on genetics and genomics this Action  will improve understanding of, and hence better control, of PRRS. The strategies derived from this Action  will benefit animal health, producers, public health and allied organizations that have a stake in animal agriculture systems. The recommendations will be widely disseminated and serve as a roadmap for training and future initiatives.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA0902    

 The main objective of the Action  was to understand the mechanisms of sexual/apomictic plant reproduction and to facilitate the use of this increased knowledge in the development of new approaches in biotechnology, agriculture and food industry through improved crops. Although most desirable crop traits are polygenic, no plant breeding tools exist, which allow the efficient fixation of multigenic traits over successive generations. Among several reproductive system-related strategies for fixation of desirable agronomic traits, one of the best choices is apomixis (i.e. clonal seed production) that would enable the instantaneous fixation of the complete genome of the best plants. For instance, apomixis technology would allow the fixation of heterosis in F1 hybrids. Moreover, when coupled with male-sterility systems, apomictic reproduction (with no need for male contribution) could help in addressing issues related to transgene escape from GM crops to organic or conventional crops, and thereby allow for better coexistence systems in Europe. The overall goal of the Action  was to allow for a synergy of inter-related European and international expertise to better understand the mechanisms of sexual/apomictic plant reproduction and to facilitate the application of this increased knowledge in the development of new approaches for agriculture and food industry to increase productivity.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA0903    

 The main objective of this Action  is to constitute an international scientific and technology network on issues related to eco-sustainable Polymer Nanocomposites Food Packaging for the preservation, conservation and distribution of high quality and safe food. The Action  will constitute an international scientific and technology network on issues related to Eco-sustainable Polymer Nanomaterials for Food Packaging (PNFP), for the preservation, conservation and distribution of high quality and safe food. The Action aims at exploiting the potentiality of polymer nanotechnology in the area of food packaging treating in a complete way the demanding needs of the users, such as health, environment, taste, cost and the specific requirements of the food industry. The envisioned direction is to look at the complete life cycle of the PNFP by the combined efforts of leading research and industrial groups. The Action  will identify the barriers (in research and technology, safety, standardisation, trained workforce and technology transfer) that prevent a complete successful development of PNFP and will indicate the strategies to proceed further.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA0904    

 The main objective of this Action  is to identify bottlenecks limiting the content of bioavailable minerals (Fe, Zn, Mg, Se) in the consumable crop parts and to provide solutions for an approximately 3-fold increase in bioavailable food/feed mineral content but at the same time limit the entry of bioavailable Cd and As in food/feed to safe standards so as to consequently improve and protect human and animal health. Global food systems are failing to provide adequate quantities of essential nutrients and other factors needed for good health, productivity and well-being of people. Improving content especially of Fe, Zn, Mg and Se will improve the nutritional value of crop-derived food or feed, potentially enhancing human and animal health. At the same time, the content of toxic minerals, Cd and As, and anti-nutritional compounds limiting mineral bioavailability, needs to be reduced to improve food safety. In this COST Action  several bottlenecks in the food/feed production chain limiting mineral status will be addressed by employing agronomic, genomic, biotechnological, and innovative food processing techniques in an interdisciplinary and integrated approach. Four working groups will focus on soil mineral bioavailability; plant biology; food/feed processing; and food/feed mineral bioavailability related to human/animal health.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA0905    

 The main objective of this Action  is to bring together, coordinate, and enhance the performance of nationally-funded research activities by forming a coherent, interdisciplinary research  training network that will develop an integrated vision on the regulatory role of UV-B in plant growth and development at cell, organism and ecosystem level. Significant new understanding of UV-B mediated processes in plants has been gained during the last decade. Rather than being a damaging agent, it is now recognised that UV-B radiation is a specific regulator of gene expression, metabolite profiles, and responses to climate change parameters. This COST- Action  will generate knowledge on the fundamentals of plant growth, food quality, and plant-environment interactions by integrating nationally and internationally funded research on UV-B mediated regulation of molecular, physiological, metabolic and ecological processes. The aim of this Action  is to develop an integrated vision of the role of UV-B in plant growth across a range of organisational levels and natural and agricultural systems.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA0906    

 The main objective of this Action  is to mainstream and catalyze transnational research in the flavour area, through coordination of research activities in genomics, functional genomics, biodiversity, metabolic engineering, and bioprocessing engineering. The immediate scientific and technological benefit will be to build the foundation for the development of biotechnological and eco-efficient production of natural flavour compounds that will eliminate potential risks for consumer s health and the environment. Flavours and Fragrances (F F) are highly important quality components in food, beverages, cosmetics, detergents and pharmaceutical products. Nowadays, most F F molecules are produced by chemical synthesis or by extraction from plants. The need for environmentally friendly processes and the consumer s preference for natural products encourage research and development in the biotechnological production of F F. This calls for a strong investment in capacity building through molecular, genetic and metabolic studies of the microbial flavour synthesis, which is at the moment relatively scarce. This COST Action  will build a unique European Yeast Flavour Network addressing fundamental research in natural bioflavour production through an innovative systems biology approach.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA0907    

 The food industry is constantly challenged to meet consumer demands for new food products that are safe, convenient, affordable, pleasurable and healthy. An understanding of fundamental structure function relationships of food components is a key to the design of new foods. Ingredient formulation and production processes have a major role in commercial food development but their impact on food structure is poorly characterised. Furthermore the influence of structure and physical properties on the nutritional and health inducing properties of foods (e.g. bioavailability/efficacy of nutrients/ bioactives) has received very little research. This Action  will create an interdisciplinary team to apply the fundamental structure-properties knowledge of multiphase-foods (foams, emulsions) to real food systems, with a view to designing end-products with good sensory quality and health benefits. The Action  will create an expert network to bridge the gap between material scientists, food technologists and nutritionists.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1001    

 There is an increasing awareness of the potential of proteomic technologies to study production animals but the use of proteomic strategies to investigate animal health and disease has been limited by the lack of international coordination and collaboration. The COST Action  will form a network of the leading European scientists who are focused on farm animal proteomics; this network will benefit the European Research Area scientific community by providing a conduit for the rapid dissemination of knowledge on the techniques and applications of this rapidly advancing area. It will benefit the European economy by providing advanced analytical tools to enhance animal production, health and welfare, as well as in the assessment of food quality and safety related to the protein in food produced from animal origin.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1002    

 The grapevine genepool is particularly threatened in the marginal areas of its distribution range. At the same time, grapevine genetic resources in the presumed area of its domestication (south-eastern Europe and particularly the Caucasus) and along the migration route across Europe are poorly known while enclosing still untapped diversity and richness. To address this challenge scientists and breeders need to work together at an international level to generate knowledge about the valuable diversity, its patterns, processes and correlations with traits such as resistance and grape quality. This COST Action  will enable researchers from east and west European countries to work together to explore, on a large geographic scale and in a very wide range of countries, the genetic diversity and mobilize adaptive traits for breeding and sustainable use of this very valuable horticultural crop. Sharing experiences, responsibilities, information and materials for the development of phenotyping methods and association genetics studies in core collections will greatly improve the impact of the research conducted by each partner and will introduce innovative areas of research at the European level, creating beneficial knowledge, long-term conservation and a greater quality of grape production in Europe.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1003    

 Marine fish are important resources in Europe but human pressures severely threaten their biodiversity and abundance.  There is an urgent need to improve the knowledge-base underlying their sustainable management. Physiological research reveals how marine fish are adapted to their environment, and causal mechanisms underlying their distribution and abundance.  Thus, the emerging field of conservation physiology can provide improved predictions on the impacts of environmental challenges, and refine conservation strategies.  There are over 50 institutions in Europe performing research in marine fish physiology, behaviour, ecology, and in modelling impacts of environmental challenges.  This COST Action  pioneers the coordination and integration of these multidisciplinary research activities across Europe. The COST action will: Coordinate marine fish conservation physiology research, to collate existing knowledge, reduce overlap, identify critical gaps in knowledge, and devise common approaches. Coordinate interactions among physiologists, community ecologists and forecast modellers, to integrate physiology into models, improve their predictive power, and identify conservation priorities. Coordinate interactions among researchers and policy makers/stakeholders, to promote integration of research outcomes into strategies and policy decisions, for sustainable management of biodiversity and resources. This will be achieved through workshops, dedicated publications, conferences, targeted scientific exchanges, and common funding applications.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1004    

 The main objective of the Action  is to spread and improve current basic knowledge on food digestion, on the release during digestion of protein beneficial food components known to have a potential effect on human health and to promote harmonization of currently used digestion models. EU legislation, as advised by EFSA, demands proper scientific data in nutrition and health claims. There is a lot of data being generated on the link between the food digestion and human health and a significant effort continues to be expended separately in each EU country on optimizing food for preventing the development of food-related diseases. This COST Action  will gradually build a European network that will spread and improve current basic knowledge on food digestion and promote harmonization of currently used digestion models used including validation with human data from different populations such as infants, elderly, sport professionals etc. A multidisciplinary scientific community will be built on this topic gathering scientists from different disciplines (food science, nutrition, physiology, immunology, cell biology ). The Action  will facilitate the transfer of new scientific advances to European food companies (large groups as well as SMEs) for developing new functional foods and reinforcing their competitiveness in a growing world market.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1005    

 The main objective of the Action  is cross-linking within a multi-disciplinary network European scientists with diverse expertise on plant natural products (PNP) chemistry, plant metabolic engineering, plant enzymology, systems biology and computational biology, and chemistry to define and develop rational design strategies to produce known and novel PNP of pharmaceutical and industrial interest in a sustainable, economical, and ecological way. A tremendous amount of knowledge has been gained during the last decades about the biosynthetic capacity of plants and the pathways leading to the formation of plant natural products (PNPs), many of which are of high relevance as pharmaceuticals or fine chemicals for industries. To fully exploit the capacity of engineering plants for the production of high value PNPs this Action  will support and enhance a pan-European network which will amalgamate resources, define target pathways and prioritize compounds, disseminate novel technologies and applications, set standards for computational support, and develop synthetic approaches in plant metabolic engineering. Outcomes will help guiding researchers in the design of plants as production host and provide building blocks for pathway engineering.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1006    

 Saffron is the highest priced agricultural product and a good example of profitability, sustainability, cultural and social values, and high labour demand. This COST Action  addresses coordinated research on Saffron -OMICS for crop improvement, traceability, determination of authenticity, adulteration and origin to provide new insights that will lead a sound Saffron Bio-Economy. Research groups involved in this COST Action  join experience in different plant sciences. They will combine and focus their efforts on a variety of scientific objectives toward main challenges found in the Saffron crop. Novel concepts on genomics such as genotyping will be exploited. New, parallel data acquisition technologies in metabolomics and large-scale phytochemistry have effectively changed bottlenecks in crop  food research, from data acquisition to data interpretation. To meet this challenge requires a concerted cross-project and multi-disciplinary approach from the different domains considered in this proposal. Increased knowledge of genetics and physiology of traditional crops through the omics revolution  is a need. The aim of CAP is to guarantee long-term food security, quality, value and diversity of food produced sustainably, and creating local employment. The development of sustainable rural economies based on HVAP such as Saffron, in synergy with DG SANCO's policies, is pursued in the EU.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1101    

 This Action  aims to optimise non-destructive in vivo(iv) and post mortem (pm) imaging and spectroscopic methods for the measurement of body composition and meat quality (MQ) in major farm animal species and to devise standardised principles of carcass classification and grading (CCG) across countries. These actions are necessary for the development of value-based payment and marketing systems (VBMS) and to meet the urgent need for market orientated breeding programmes. FAIM encompasses collaboration of hard- and software manufacturers with livestock and imaging academic experts to develop required products for implementing the scientific work. FAIM will coordinate and strengthen EU scientific and technical research through improved cooperation and interactions. This will be essential for achieving the required advances in CCG systems to measure carcass yield and MQ, to meet the industry need for VBMS, and to improve production efficiency throughout the meat supply chain (MSC). FAIM will also support EU legislation on individual animal identification through showing the additional benefits of feeding back abattoir data on individual animals for optimising management, breeding and providing phenotypic information which will facilitate future implementation of genome wide selection.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1102    

 Plants are associated with micro  and nanoorganisms: Endophytic bacteria and fungi, which live inter- and intracellularly in plants without inducing pathogenic symptoms, interact with the host biochemically and genetically. Endophytic microorganisms (EMOs) may function as plant growth and defense promoters by synthesising phytohormones, producing biosurfactants, enzymes or precursors for secondary plant metabolites, fixing atmospheric nitrogen and CO 2  or control plant diseases as well as providing a source for new bioactive natural products with utility in pharmaceutical, agrochemical and other LifeScience applications. The use of these EMOs to control plant-pathogenic bacteria and fungi is receiving increasing attention as a sustainable alternative to synthetic pesticides and antibiotics. Furthermore, these EMOs are likely to be adapted to the presence and metabolism of complex organic molecules and therefore show useful biodegradation activities. In order to reduce the input of pesticides and fertilizers and to bring European added value to an eco-friendly agriculture, it will be important to develop inocula of biofertilizers, stress protection and biocontrol agents. The aim of the Action  is to identify bottlenecks limiting the use of endophytes in biotechnology and agriculture and to provide solutions for the economically and ecologically compatible exploitation of endophytes.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1103    

 This Action  aims at creating a dynamic network of scientists and other professionals conducting research to improve sweet or sour cherry production in Europe, the main cherry producer. Cherries are highly appreciated fruits for their taste and nutritional properties. Their production is economically important for many fruit growers in almost every European region but there is a need for coordinated research. Therefore, this network will address all research aspects related to cherry production, commercialisation, and consumption. It will be multidisciplinary and will involve scientists working in the fields of plant breeding, genetics, genomics, agronomy, physiology, phytopathology, entomology, microbiology, post-harvest technology, and socio-economics. A special emphasis will be placed on key EU priorities such as the promotion of sustainable agriculture and adaptation to climate change. Expected deliverables will be the exchange of data between research teams, the adoption of common experimental protocols, the implementation of predictive models in the fields of epidemiology and tree phenology, and the establishment of coordinated European marker-assisted selection strategies, including multi-location field trials. Beneficiaries will include not only breeders and producers but consumers as well, through the availability of better cherries.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1104    

 Organic greenhouse horticulture (OGH)(i.e the production in greenhouses or polytunnels) in the EU should improve its sustainability, production and productivity. Emissions of nutrients and its footprint should be reduced. Production and productivity are too low to meet the demand of the society. The scientific challenges are to design sustainable irrigation and fertilization strategies, to reveal the mechanisms of resilience, robustness and suppressiveness for the management of pests and diseases, to integrate crop management, energy saving, renewable energy sources and new techniques and combinations with other activities and business to realize climate neutral production. This COST Action  coordinates, strengthens and focuses the activities  of the partners. It improves the communication, offers a common agenda, more and better knowledge for less money, sharing new techniques, an improved dissemination to OGH, basis for further collaboration in joint research proposals and support in the development of EU standards for OGH.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1105    

 Because it is now well admitted that daily consumption of fruit provides important health benefits, it becomes important to decipher the mechanisms by which nutritional and sensory qualities are established during fruit development. Building on the completion of the whole genome sequence for the two major fleshy fruit species tomato and grapevine, the proposed COST Action  aims to bring together research groups working on climacteric (tomato) and non-climacteric (grape) model fruits to exchange knowledge and to harness European research in this area to the most advanced genomics and post-genomics technologies. The Action  is expected to bring new insight on the physiology and biochemistry of fleshy fruit. The training of researchers on cutting-edge methodologies and the implementation of bioinformatics tools for data integration will significantly enhance the competitiveness of European research in this field. Combining studies on the two fruit models in an unprecedented multidisciplinary approach will expand our understanding of fruit development and will provide new leads to improve fruit quality.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1106    

 Parental stress before, during and after conception (i.e. the periconception period) induces epigenetic changes in gametes and embryos. Such epigenetic changes may adversely affect the future health, development, productivity and fertility of those offspring. While there is increasing evidence for this in agricultural species, most of this knowledge derives from epidemiological studies in humans and controlled studies in laboratory animals. In this COST Action , time frames and mechanisms during which the gametes and early embryo are susceptible to epigenetic modifications will be determined in livestock in order to optimize their health and productivity. This COST Action  will identify stressors and molecules which induce, modulate or remove epigenetic marks on genes that are relevant for different applications in farm animals. Public engagement activities are planned during the COST Action  to inform the general public on the importance of the epigenome via the periconception environment in future food production, health and welfare. Research on epigenetic control of development is being performed by different groups in the EU, but efforts need to be coordinated in order to avoid duplication, set targets and guidance for future research and to standardise protocols in this field through a large collaborative EU network. These goals can only be achieved under a COST programme.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1201    

 Persistent bacteria on foods and processing sites are of great concern in food industry causing continuous recontamination and safety problems. Removal of persistent bacteria and biofilms requires costly efforts leading to lost productivity and environmental issues. There is a need to combine and re-evaluate current scientific knowledge on persistence of bacteria and to introduce new engineering approaches for controlling pathogens. The objective of this Action  is to enable the development/promotion of targeted solutions for controlling risks associated with persistent bacteria and biofilms in the food industry. It involves a multidisciplinary network which will expand our knowledge on colonization and persistence, and validate/identify appropriate methods for monitoring colonisation patterns. Known and emerging intervention methods will be explored and re-evaluated. The knowledge obtained will be promoted to the relevant food industries and the scientific community.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1202    

 Common ragweed ( Ambrosia artemisiifolia ) is one of the most prominent invasive alien species (IAS) in Europe. Its pollen grains are noxious aeroallergens, it is an important agricultural weed and also occupies large non-crop areas with a range that is likely to accelerate under climate change. As a result, long-term and widely applicable options are required for its sustainable management, as well as the coordination of institutions involved in Ambrosia  research and management throughout Europe. SMARTER will establish an interdisciplinary network including experts currently involved in the control of ragweed, Non-COST key-experts, health care professionals, aerobiologists, economists, and atmospheric and agricultural modellers. SMARTER will provide a forum for discussing long-term management and monitoring options and the development of new innovative management solutions, such as a synergy between biological, physical and chemical control measures and vegetation management, and assess their cost-effectiveness in mitigating the effects of IAS. SMARTER will act as a catalyst for long-term research, provide an information platform and develop best practice manuals for the integrated management of ragweed. It will also help to tackle other IAS, benefit all sectors affected by IAS, promote outstanding R D, innovation in industry and provide support for policy-makers in the European Research Area ( ERA ).       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1203    

 Due to limited availability of arable land, and water resources, the large use of fertilizers, and the high market demand for vegetables, cucurbits and solanaceous crops are frequently cultivated under unfavourable soil and environmental conditions. These include soilborne pathogens, salinity, thermal stress, drought, and heavy metals. These harmful conditions are magnified by the changing environmental conditions and the restrictive policies of agrochemical use. One way to avoid or reduce losses in production caused by adverse conditions in vegetables would be to graft them onto rootstocks capable of alleviating the effect of external stresses on the shoot. This Action  aims to stimulate cutting-edge multidisciplinary collaborative research towards identifying and understanding how rootstock-mediated traits can improve vegetable crop yield and quality under biotic and abiotic adverse conditions. Sharing knowledge and enhancing scientific and technical collaboration will surely fill knowledge gaps in the area of vegetable grafting. This Action  can also stimulate the wider commercial development and exploitation of this technique in Europe. The knowledge gained will be summarized in a book as a final output of this Action . Moreover, all data and information of this Action  will be disseminated to the public through a dedicate website.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1204    

 During the past six years, three international workshops on fish gametes demonstrated a rapid development of methodologies that encompass extensive opportunities for promising use in basic reproductive biology, genetic research, biotechnology and aquaculture practice. All of these can have far-reaching consequences on conservation of endangered species, assessment of anthropogenic and climatic impacts on aquatic species and application in aquaculture, as well as in fisheries management. In particular, it has been recognized that there are many highly diverting details in the practical application of these new methods used by most scientists and laboratories, which can cause highly variable if not contradicting results, even using the same species. There is an urgent need towards a universal scale to assess both the precise state of sexual maturation (for secure broodstock use) and related life history traits (gamete quality assessment, incubation of eggs) in teleost fish and other commercially important invertebrates used in either bioassays or aquaculture. The aim of the proposed AQUAGAMETE COST Action  is to reach a consensus on protocols and guidelines (using internationally defined terminology, units of measurement and format of reporting) that permit the use of results in relational databanks for sound and common application in aquaculture research and commerce.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1205    

 Strigolactones (SLs) are newly discovered phytohormones that contribute to define plant morphology, also in response to environmental conditions, and to the dialogue with organisms in the rhizosphere. As a consequence, SLs have become a cutting-edge topic in plant biology and agronomy, having a great potential in modern agriculture. However, little is known about how they act, their biosynthesis and signaling pathways. Because of their both endogenous and exogenous role as signaling molecules, SLs are well placed to mediate both adaptive changes in the plant architecture and beneficial rhizosphere interactions. Even though SLs are a prime interest for many laboratories across disciplines, there are no official networks neither in Europe nor in the rest of the world on this subject. An outcome of an EU network on this subject would be  sustaining and promoting the EU leadership in SLs-related sciences, the coordination of SLs research activities and a transfer of knowledge which may lead to the development of targeted and sustainable agro-technologies. The aim of this proposal is the creation of such multidisciplinary network of experts, of both basic and applied sciences, who can share expertise through the flexibility of the COST framework.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1206    

 For several decades, poultry production worldwide has been struggling with severe diseases and huge economic losses caused by Avian Coronavirus (AvCoV) infections. Control of the disease is hampered by the variations within this virus family. As a result of its variability, the nomenclature as well as detection methods and classification of the virus strains are not consistent. This Action  creates a network between scientists with expertise in AvCoV. It stimulates cooperation between researchers, fosters harmonization of nomenclature and classification, and facilitates surveillance. In order to achieve this and to cover all important aspects, five interlinked Working Groups are established which deal with Molecular Virology, Serology and Immunology, Clinic and Pathology, Epidemiology and conceptualizing an infrastructure for collaborative research, respectively. Furthermore, a joint website is created where general information on AvCoV, notifications of outbreaks and research results are shared between the COST members. COST is the ideal platform to accomplish the described aims as different research projects concerning AvCoV are currently funded. The COST Action  provides the possibility to connect researchers working on the topic and thereby enabling them to use their resources more efficiently. European poultry producers, industry, veterinarians and consumers will benefit from results generated in the course of this Action .        Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1207    

 Restrictions on the use of pesticides mean that there is a need for new, sustainable pest control methods. Exploiting natural plant disease resistance is highly attractive, as it reduces the dependency on pesticides. However, the use of crop resistance is bound by two factors: the limited number of resistance sources against important diseases in major crops and the frequent breakdown of resistance due to rapid evolution of pathogens. Both issues can now be addressed by innovative and powerful approaches developed on the basis of recent and unprecedented progress in research on plants and their pathogens fostered by the revolution in next generation sequencing and the investigation of pathogen effector proteins. The challenge is to implement these novel pathogen-informed strategies for the generation of sustainable broad-spectrum crop resistance. Hence, this COST Action  aims to create a European network of scientists and breeders for the translation of breakthroughs in plant-pathogen interaction research into effective breeding strategies for durable disease resistance in cereal and Solanaceous  crops which are of primary importance for European agriculture.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1208    

 New scientific knowledge and animal welfare concerns led to including cephalopods in the new European Directive on animal protection (Directive 2010/63/EU) making them the first invertebrates obtaining protection. Knowledge of the welfare and best experimental practices for these species has been scarce, scattered among research groups and lacking consensus. Dedicated recent efforts will shortly produce Code of Practice and general Guidelines for care and management of cephalopods in research and education. However, practical implementation and dedicated species-specific procedures to comply with the Directive are required. CephsInAction will establish an interdisciplinary network of experts who will promote training, dissemination, sharing of tools and knowledge to improve such procedures, and it will foster multi-disciplinary and inter-species scientific exchanges to integrate knowledge on welfare practices. A network of experts and users will collect, refine, distribute and improve knowledge that is currently distributed between research groups and available only to them. This will allow development of new experimental practices, actions for reduction, refinement and reuse principles when applied to cephalopods. This COST Action  is also aimed to support emerging scientific demands, and to promote cephalopod research, conservation and public awareness.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1301    

 Methane is a greenhouse gas (GHG) that contributes to climate change. The livestock sector, particularly ruminants, is estimated to contribute up to 18% of total global anthropogenic GHG emissions. Preliminary data suggest that genetic selection to reduce methane emissions is possible. However, successful breeding programs require large datasets of individual animal measurements which cannot be generated by any EU country working alone. Smaller datasets of methane measurements are being generated by individual countries across the EU, which could be combined if agreement could be reached on how best to harmonise the data. Discussing harmonisation and protocols for future collection of such data is the focus of this METHAGENE network. METHAGENE aims to discuss and agree on 1) protocols to harmonise large-scale methane measurements using different techniques; 2) easy to record and inexpensive proxies for methane emissions to be used for genetic evaluations; and 3) approaches for incorporating methane emissions into national breeding strategies. METHAGENE will co-ordinate and strengthen EU scientific and technical research through improved cooperation and interactions, which is essential for breeding ruminants with lower environmental footprints resulting in less contribution to global warming.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1302    

 Grapevine trunk diseases (GTD) are the most destructive diseases of vineyards worldwide. Fungicides with the potential to control GTD have been banned and there are no highly effective treatments available. Developing sustainable alternatives to manage GTD is therefore required. A coordinated research approach in Europe is currently not existing, even though a strong demand for innovative disease management strategies is given. The goal of this Action  would be to develop a network of European expertise to improve understanding of GTD by acquiring knowledge on occurrence of pathogens, vine-pathogen interaction, ecology of wood-inhabiting microorganisms, and to develop new management protocols and biocontrol approaches. This COST Action  gathers leading multidisciplinary academic researchers and institutes within Europe to propose new recommendations for the management of GTD and establish Europe as a world leader in GTD research to safeguard vineyards. This knowledge will be promoted in an effort to increase knowledge and awareness of the problem by disseminating information to end-users and authorities in the viticulture sector, and to the general public.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1303    

 The study of swimming of fish is essential for our understanding of the interplay between migration, growth and reproduction in wild fish but also has considerable interest for fish in aquaculture. The main objective of FITFISH is to develop a research network in which fish swimming in the wild and in aquaculture is studied for the first time under a multidisciplinary perspective. Scientists from various disciplines will work together under the umbrella of swimming exercise. FITFISH will provide the ground for technological breakthroughs (e.g. more accurate monitoring of migrant fish; design of exercise- friendly  fish farming facilities), for establishing swimming as an essential factor determining welfare and for demonstrating that swimming can benefit quality production. By providing this knowledge FITFISH will have a societal (economic and cultural) impact in areas such as environmental and fisheries policy, industrial activity in aquaculture and even human health. FITFISH will add value to independent, nationally funded research activities by providing the means to exchange information, promote industrial activities and influence policies at a European level in a new common forum. Activities in FITFISH also include the training and exchange of early stage researchers in the area to create future leaders with a true multidisciplinary vision.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1304    

 Aquaponics is an innovative, sustainable food production system integrating aquaculture with hydroponic vegetal crops. Aquaponics has a key role to play in food provision and tackling global challenges such as water scarcity, food security, urbanization, and reductions in energy use and food miles. The EU acknowledges these challenges through its Common Agriculture Policy and policies on Water Protection, Climate Change, and Social Integration. A European approach is required in the globally emerging aquaponics research field building on the foundations of Europe s status as a global centre of excellence and technological innovation in the domains of aquaculture and hydroponic horticulture. The EU Aquaponics Hub aims to the development of aquaponics in the EU, by leading the research agenda through the creation of a networking hub of expert research and industry scientists, engineers, economists, aquaculturists and horticulturalists, and contributing to the training of young aquaponic scientists. The EU Aquaponics Hub focuses on three primary systems in three settings; 1) cities and urban areas  - urban agriculture aquaponics, 2) developing country systems  - devising systems and technologies for food security for local people and 3) industrial scale aquaponics  - providing competitive systems delivering cost effective, healthy and sustainable local food in the EU.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1305    

 Crops have been bred to improve production, paying less attention to stress. Stress is mitigated by treatments such as irrigation, pesticides and fertilizers. These managements have reduced the use of plant genetic resources in overcoming crop limitations so that some species/varieties containing useful sources of tolerance are forgotten. However, the use of pesticides, fertilizer and water must be reduced and agriculture must become more sustainable. While significant progress has been made in molecular and genetic analysis of model plants, the quantitative high throughput screening for crops is a major bottleneck. Reliable identification of tolerant varieties and the understanding of their genetic diversity are urgently needed. Phenotyping is an emerging science that characterises plant behaviour and quantifies features such as growth and stress tolerance in a way that allows linking to genetic control. This Action  will create a network of European scientists with expertise on phenotyping, various -omics areas and/or physiology to (re)discover tolerant varieties and to understand tolerance. The Action  will survey knowledge about plant biodiversity with respect to stress tolerance and will share and group existing expertise into discussions and conceptual development of new tools in phenotyping by integrating information from the cellular level to the whole plant level.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1306    

 SUPER-B will bring together scientific and societal communities involved in the conservation and sustainable management of ecosystem services mediated by pollinators. 70% of our crops need insects for optimal pollination; these include many fruits, nuts, oil crops, fibres and vegetables with some producing no yield  without insect pollination. The direct economic value of crop pollination by insects in the EU is 14 billion euro annually. Moreover, 80% of wild plant species benefit from animal pollinators for fruit and seed production, making pollination a key service for ecosystem and biodiversity maintenance. SUPER-B will combine scientific evidence (existing and new knowledge) and social feedback for developing conservation strategies for pollinators. Specifically, the Action  will (1) identify the role of insect pollination in agriculture and other ecosystems; (2) clarify best practices for mitigation of pollination loss, and (3) compare and contrast important drivers of pollinator loss (wild and managed species). SUPER-B will contribute towards maintaining natural ecosystems and achieving sustainable use of pollinators in agricultural production. Its results are relevant to all European countries and will be disseminated to a wide community of beneficiaries (scientists, farmers, beekeepers, industry, policy-makers, NGOs and the public).       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1307    

  Animal wellbeing is at the start of a chain that links to farmer profitability, product quality, consumer satisfaction and environmental sustainability . This Action  will focus on the talents, skills and resources of researchers, industry partners and stakeholders in the dairy-foods chain onto the topic of dairy animal health and welfare.  European dairy farms are getting larger. Dairy cows remain in focus, but there is growing interest in other dairy species. Milking technology is advancing, as is biotechnology relevant to animal wellbeing. European consumers prioritise animal wellbeing and product quality, whilst recognizing the importance of global food security and the need for increased milk production. Relevant research is happening across different disciplines (biological, ethological, technological) and in many different and diverse parts of Europe. The Action  will maximum value from this research by networking, coordination and avoiding duplication. The Action s scientific focus will be on new and emerging developments in welfare biomarkers, activity-based welfare assessment and their combination and integration into smart  husbandry support systems that will ensure optimum welfare for dairy animals.  The Action  will disseminate outputs widely to researchers, industry, dairy farmer end-users, consumers, policy makers and society generally. It will ensure that European dairy research remains world-leading, that European dairy animals are the best cared-for in the world, and that European consumers can take pride in European dairy industries that are competitive, responsible and sustainable.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1308    

 The hoped for  reduction in the use of antibiotics in pig by EU producers has not materialized as they are still being widely used for the control of enteric infectious diseases. This practice can spread antibiotic resistance in the farm environment and poses a threat to consumer health. Whilst it is widely recognized that a diversified gastro-intestinal tract (GIT) microbiota is essential for optimal health and performance, the underlying factors favoring the development and maintenance of a balanced intestinal microbiota are not fully understood. PiGutNet will establish the first European network focused on this topic, joining specialists in all research areas. It will define both environmental and host genetic factors affecting the GIT microbiota and the complex interactions between microbiota and gut maturation, to maintain a healthy gut throughout life. The network will coordinate databases and unravel innovative tools to define the status of intestinal eubiosis in pigs. The most important outcomes will be genome/metabolome-wide association studies and the provision of a road map to increase pig resistance against GIT infections. This will have an important translational potential, being the foundation for European companies to develop strategies in the areas of feed additives and animal husbandry, resulting in improved animal health and welfare, consumer protection and competitive advantage for the European agriculture       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1401    

 Due to the continuing growth of the world population from 7 billion today to 9 billion in 2050, we will face a shortage of protein sources for human consumption in the near future. For this reason, Horizon 2020 included the topic: Sustainable European bio-economy; bridging the gap between new technologies and their implementation  within their research program. Food safety assessment is an important requirement before new products can be brought to market. Such assessments include the investigation of microbiological and toxicological hazards as well as the risk of food allergy. From an industry perspective, there is a need for a) relatively cheap, easy and reliable tools for screening for allergenicity of new or modified  food proteins, b) early risk based decision-making during product development and c) an improved risk assessment strategy accepted by regulatory authorities. The new multi-disciplinary scientific network will improve strategies to predict the allergenicity of novel or modified  proteins or proteins from novel sources with novel and innovative approaches that have not previously been identified. This will allow the transfer of scientific advances to European food companies to develop safe products, advise food safety authorities on better risk assessment strategies and change public opinion on the safety of novel sustainable food.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1402    

 To combat the burden of cardiometabolic disease, which constitutes a major public health issue in Europe, it is of crucial importance to develop efficient strategies that target the dietary behaviours of European consumers and improve the food supply. Plant foods are rich sources of a large range of bioactive compounds that beneficially affect our health, particularly by decreasing the risk of cardiometabolic diseases. However, heterogeneity in individuals  responsiveness to plant food bioactives can obscure associations between dietary intakes and health, hinder the identification of health benefits for specific population groups and limit our understanding of the exact role of the different bioactives. POSITIVe specifically addresses inter-individual variation in bioavailability and physiological responses to consumption of plant food bioactives in relation to cardiometabolic endpoints. This Action  will coordinate a multidisciplinary and multisectorial European network, harness and combine the currently fragmented knowledge and ensure the optimal translation of findings into applications. It will promote the leadership of European research in this active and high-profile research field, provide scientific knowledge to regulatory authorities for a new generation of nutritional recommendations targeted to large population subgroups and foster the competitiveness of the European food industry by underpinning the development of new functional/customized foods.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1403    

 Poultry ectoparasites are of particular concern for the European Industry. The poultry red mite (PRM), Dermanyssus gallinae , is the most significant pest of laying hens in Europe. A relationship between infestation and hen mortality exists and at a sub-lethal level causes significant stress to birds and a decline in egg quality and production. The current norm of 50,000 PRM/hen, rising to 500,000 in extreme circumstances, and 80% PRM prevalence in most European countries cannot be considered acceptable, and must be reduced. This holds especially true as recent and impending legislation to improve hen welfare in this region will exacerbate the negative impact of this pest, compromising production and potentially exposing such legislation as counterintuitive in terms of overall hen health and welfare. COREMI will look to advance and disseminate comprehensive Integrated Pest Management (IPM) for PRM by collating knowledge of mite biology, the mite-host relationship and novel control and coordinating further research work in the area. This information will be used to produce industry Gold Standards  for PRM prevention and control, tailored to individual countries and production systems. A more complete understanding of PRM impact to poultry and other sectors, including public health, will also be achieved through the Action .       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1404    

 Crop plants interact with both arthropods and microorganisms, including pests that reduce yields (in Europe up to 20% annually) and mutualists that promote yield. Direct and indirect interactions between microorganisms and arthropods on crops can strongly modify their impacts on yield. For instance, herbivores and pathogens can facilitate each other, causing additional yield loss. On the other hand, beneficial microorganisms can induce defenses that protect plants against herbivores. There is thus potential to enhance crop production and reduce pesticide use if we can better predict and manage Crop-Arthropod-Microorganism (CAMo) interactions to our advantage. Currently, knowledge of CAMo interactions is limited due to historical separation of the involved research fields. This COST Action  will therefore combine existing expertise on CAMo interactions in Europe, from basic and strategic research to agri-R D companies, and form an interdisciplinary platform and incubator for research on mechanisms, impacts and utilization of CAMo interactions on crop yield. The COST Action  will also strengthen the careers of both female and young researchers, connect the newest research in the field with its applied use, and develop new monitoring and management support systems and CAMo-based applications.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1405    

 Seaweeds (macroalgae) are an alternative, additional source of food, feed, fuel and livelihood for humans. Currently 16M tonnes of seaweeds are collected annually for consumption or industrial processing. Production could increase, especially in Europe (only 7% of the world s production), with more appropriate and efficient seaweed cultivation techniques, to match actual and future demands. This requires a step-change in knowledge of basic seaweed biology (currently almost non-existent), to prevent restricting future increases in seaweed production. This COST Action  will develop a European interdisciplinary platform integrating unique expertise, currently scattered worldwide, to (1) fill basic research gaps on seaweed development and reproduction, and (2) transfer this scientific knowledge to aquaculture end-users to support sustainable seaweed aquaculture. Academic partners highly skilled in seaweed basic research, and RTD and Innovation Institutes dedicated to the transfer of knowledge to end-users, will coordinate and promote research through 4 major scientific tasks: Identifying how seaweeds become REPRODUCTIVELY PROFICIENT; Defining mechanisms of FERTILISATION AND EMBRYOGENESIS; Studying the kinetics and morphological principles of ADULT GROWTH; Developing TECHNICAL TOOLS to drive Tasks 1-3. This will be achieved via workshops, short-term scientific missions, training schools and symposia, and deployment of communication tools optimising the transfer from basic research to innovation.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1406    

 The objective of the Action  is to coordinate and raise the European capacity to apply Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technologies for the study and diagnosis of viral diseases  in vegetatively propagated plants, seeds and seedlings. The Action  is highly timely and needed because viral diseases are currently a major economic problem in agriculture throughout the world. The increasing importance of vegetative propagation in plant production and the intensified global plant trade are further increasing the risk of viral diseases in Europe. NGS enables rapid and reliable holistic virus identification (indexing), which is needed for the development of innovative, knowledge-based solutions for plant production. By bringing together a multidisciplinary and multi-actor consortium, the proposed action will ensure cost-effective research and build up a strong Pan-European knowledge-base network for better control of established, emerging and exotic viral plant diseases. The action will deliver new scientific knowledge about viral plant diseases that are currently poorly understood, and contribute to the development of more effective surveillance of stock material health and to the improvement of quarantine procedures. The action thus implements the EU strategy of integrated pest management and protection against harmful plant pathogens and contributes to the securement of food production.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1407    

 The main objective of EURO-FBP is to decrease the impact on human health from foodborne parasites (FBP), through establishing a risk-based control programme for FBP containing robust and appropriate protective strategies. EURO-FBP will use an interdisciplinary, One Health perspective to assimilate information, coordinate research and harmonize diagnostics, surveillance, analytical methods, potential interventions and mapping of global trends regarding FBP. The Action  will determine those FBP of greatest regional importance, pinpoint knowledge gaps, and focus resources strategically for control of FBP. FBP include protozoa, nematodes, cestodes and trematodes. Although a significant public health issue, FBP have been neglected compared with other foodborne pathogens such as viruses or bacteria. Furthermore, globalisation and changes in climate, agricultural practices, and human behaviour and lifestyles all contribute to emergence of FBP in new settings, with new hosts and transmission routes. Previously associated with specific regions, FBP are now spreading. FBP research is fragmented and groups often focus on a single genera or group of parasites. Hence COST is ideal for EURO-FBP, enabling collaboration among scientists that rarely interact. The agenda will focus on how to address FBP, optimising efforts and resources in order to control FBP in Europe - and globally.       Food and Agriculture COST Action FA1408    

 The Action  aims at the enhancement of knowledge on forest-water interactions in Europe, and the elaboration of science-based guidelines for the improvement of the management of forests predominantly designated for the production and storage of water. Forest-water interactions comprise the water resource aspect and also the problem of potential hazard to the human population. Along river systems and in their larger floodplains, peak flow rates may entail devastating floods. It is speculated that the frequency and intensity of such floods are currently increasing owing to global climatic change and a concomitant amplification of extreme weather situations. Water regulation contributing to flood control, and water supply by forest soils and aquifers are among the most prominent forest ecosystem services. However, these are potentially at risk under a changing climate and changing management practices. The state of knowledge concerning actual risk is still very limited. This COST Action  will pull together the enormous potential of forest- and water-related research in Europe in an integrated interdisciplinary approach. Thus, it will contribute to overcoming the currently existing fragmentation. Keywords:  forest-management, water resource, flood control, global change, mitigation       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP0601    

 This Action  aims at developing innovative biosciences and technologies required to build and implement advanced lignocellulose biorefineries. The primary objective is to develop environmentally sound and cost-effective biotechnical tools and production technologies to be exploited in the production of fibres, chemicals and bioenergy. European industry and R D already have a strong position within white biotechnology. This Action  would strengthen the position of Europe in the areas of white biotechnology and lignocellulose-based biorefineries. The Action  will be organized into three areas: 1) development of new biotechnical tools; enzymes and micro-organisms, 2) application of enzymatic tools and processing methods to improve the competitiveness of renewable fibre products and 3) production of second generation biofuels, bio-based polymers and chemicals. The Action  will work closely together with the European forestry-agro sector and industry. The participating experts are active in a broad range of related scientific fields (enzymology, genetics, biochemical engineering, polymer chemistry, fibre technologies). The Action  will contribute to the further development and implementation of biorefineries, thereby assisting the member countries to achieve the targets set by the European Commission for sustainable energy supply and bio-based economy. Keywords: biofuels, biorefinery, cell factories, enzymes, fibres Action  FP0602 MC1 Presentations       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP0602    

 Forest growth models are important tools within research to investigate and understand key ecosystem processes and to support forest management decisions. Sustainable forest management requires detailed information on tree growth and forest dynamics, including structural development, biodiversity indicators, and effects of disturbances. This is reflected in increasing emphasis, throughout Europe, on more detailed, versatile forest growth models which are able to forecast forest growth, account for changes in growing conditions, address risks and society needs and explicitly address forest management and its role within sustainable development. The main objective of the Action  is to promote the developing of methodologies to improve forest models to support the sustainable management of forests. The Action  will enhance the quality and consistency of forest growth models to simulate the responses of forests to alternative managerial and climate scenarios. The Action  will also demonstrate variations in regional concepts as they have evolved depending on the background of the model developers and society needs. This will be beneficial for the advancement of forest science in Europe, and will improve sustainable forest management practices. Keywords : Forest growth models; multifunctional sustainable forest management; changes in climate, management and society needs; scaling from tree, to stand, landscape, national and European level; modelling platforms and software exchange       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP0603    

 Every year about 45000 forest fires occur in Europe, burning half a million hectares of land. Post-fire forest management deals with the restoration of burned areas and with the opportunity for establishing more resilient forests and landscapes. The main objective of this Action  is the development and dissemination of scientifically based decision criteria for post-fire forest management, from stand to landscape level planning, by gathering and evaluating the results of previous and ongoing research. Secondly, it aims at transferring this scientific knowledge into management practices. Thirdly, it aims at making the connection between scientists and stakeholders by communicating these practices to the end-users. The main outcomes will be: i) a book gathering the state-of-the-art of scientific knowledge on post-fire management, ii) an electronic handbook on post-fire restoration, iii) a major conference, and iv) the organization of three Training Schools for knowledge transfer. Although focused on Southern Europe, the outcomes of this Action  will be crucial for central and northern European countries as well, as climate change and an increased area of forests are already increasing fire hazard in these regions. Keywords: fire hazard, Post-fire forest management, post-fire restoration and rehabilitation, forest and landscape resilience, knowledge transfer       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP0701    

 The main objective of the Action  is to improve the acoustic behaviour of timber based lightweight buildings as well as to develop effective prediction models and measurement schemes. There is an increasing interest in timber based lightweight components and buildings (TBLB) because of three important requirements. The raw material wood has to be used effectively because of its quantitative limitation and needs to be bounded in buildings for a long time in respect of CO2-storage regarding the global warming. Supplementary this type of construction allows an economic and very accurate industrial manufacturing. In general the acoustic performance of buildings and elements is an important topic in Europe but especially it is even more relevant for TBLBs due to their natural frequencies of resonance and the low mass of building material used in these elements. However, acoustic measurement procedures and characterizations of timber based components as well as the prediction of the acoustic performance in situ are research domains that still require further activities. This Action  will aim at advancing the relevant technical knowledge and will contribute to the development of guidelines for TBLBs focusing on an improvement of their performance regarding acoustics and low frequency vibration behaviour. Keywords: sound insulation, building acoustics, flanking transmission, timber lightweight constructions, measurement methods       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP0702    

 The main objective of the Action  is to mobilise and integrate the existing scientific knowledge for European forest policymakers and managers who have to make decisions on adaptation to and mitigation of climate change. Climate change is a major concern for forestry. Many scientific activities have been initiated in that field but did not lead yet to clear and tested strategies for action. They are either much more global than European forestry or too limited in their scopes to actually contribute to sustainable forest management. ECHOES aims at helping European decision makers and forest managers in their definition of strategies toward a reduction of forest losses, an increase of forest gains, and an adoption of mitigation and adaptation measures. It also aims at suggesting improvements of monitoring systems and identifying research priorities. In order to reach these goals, it has to focus on climate change and forests in Europe and to integrate different but tightly interrelated issues: impacts on forests with adaptation to and mitigation of climate change; climatic trends with extreme events; natural sciences with social sciences; research with actual policy and management; ecosystems with products and services; the main components of forest multifunctionality. Regional analyses, case studies and compared alternatives instead of a general consensus allow to combine a rather large scope with concrete and useful views. Keywords: Climate change, Forests impacts, Adaptation, Mitigation, Management and policies.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP0703    

 With the rapidly growing international trade in plants and ongoing impacts of climate change, activities of plant pathogens in the genus Phytophthora are increasing, threatening the biodiversity and sustainability of European forest ecosystems. This Action  unites scientists and disease control experts working on Phytophthora in forest ecosystems with the overall aim of increasing understanding of the biology and ecology of Phytophthora species with potential to cause damage to European forestry; this knowledge will be used in the development of effective control and management protocols for the problems caused. This knowledge will be promoted in an effort to increase knowledge and awareness of the problem by disseminating information to end-users and authorities in the forestry sector, and to the general public. In four interrelated working groups the ways in which Phytophthora species spread into and within Europe; examine methods to detect host resistance; disseminate state-of-the art rapid molecular diagnostics, and seek sustainable techniques for management and control of the diseases. Project  outcomes will include understanding of threats to forest ecosystems by Phytophthora, increased abilities rapidly to detect the pathogens, and sustainable management solutions to the diseases caused by these destructive organisms. Keywords: Forest ecosystems, Phytophthora, sustainability, management, diagnostics       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP0801    

 The emerging techniques in the fields of physics, chemistry, materials and computer science bear an enormous potential for the investigation of wood materials. Their appropriate application will boost the state-of-the-art in wood mechanics. Highly sophisticated imaging techniques in combination with increasing computer processing power and memory capacities allow studying materials at always smaller length scales. This COST Action  aims at exploiting the emerging experimental and computational techniques for improving the knowledge of microstructural features of wood and their relevance for the macroscopic material behaviour. Particular attention will be paid to the effects of moisture, load, temperature, and time on the mechanical behaviour. The increased knowledge of the hygro-thermo-mechanical behaviour of wood will result in a better predictability of the material properties and their changes over time and, thus, enhance the reliability of the material. Together with the improved characterisation techniques, the better knowledge base will create new possibilities for the development and engineering design of innovative wood-based products in the future, starting off at the scale of the wood cell wall or its constituents. Stimulating the use of wood as a renewable and CO2 neutral raw material will contribute to a sustainable development in Europe. Keywords: wood and wood products, ultrastructure, (hygro-)mechanical properties, modelling, sustainability       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP0802    

 The main objective of the Action  is to improve and to coordinate the methods and the knowledge to measure and calculate belowground carbon (C) turnover rates, and to implement the obtained values in improved biogeochemical models to develop sustainable belowground C management strategies for European forest ecosystems to ensure a maximum of resilience under adverse or gradually changing environmental conditions.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP0803    

 The main objective of the Action  is to develop a procedural framework, information standards and guidelines for the development, testing and evaluation as well as the application of Decision Support Systems for forest management problems in multifunctional forestry.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP0804    

 Trees, annual and perennial plants, recycled fibres, and lignocellulosic side streams from forest and agroindustry are renewable resources for the development of natural materials, biochemicals, and bioenergy. The chemical complexity of plant materials, the feed material of Biorefineries, renders the analyses of the feed constituents, processes, and valorised products challenging. The main objective of the Action  is to develop new and evaluate existing analytical methods related to forest-based and agroindustrial Biorefineries. Thus, the Action  covers the analytical methods for the Biorefinery feed material and for processed biochemicals, biomaterials, and process residues. Especially analytical pretreatments will be evaluated. Critical steps are the representativeness of the sampling and samples, the extraction, fractionation, and sample storage methods applied. New methods will be applied and evaluated for their relevance. Other emphasised areas will be development of analytical on-line applications, hyphenated techniques, and applying statistical multicomponent analyses to sort out the relevant data from the main data stream. The European forest-based, bioenergy-based and agroindustrial industries will benefit from the Action  in receiving relevant information on their developments of sustainable and environmentally benign solutions for novel utilisation of renewable resources. The development of analytical tools will lead to cost effective and sustainable processes and products.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP0901    

 The main objective is to harmonise forest energy terminology and methodologies of forest operations research and biomass availability calculations thereby building the scientific capacity within forest energy research and supporting the technology transfer of the forest biomass procurement chain and sustainable forest management. At present the use of forest biomass for energy is an increasingly important topic particularly in light of the debate on climate change. Forest biomass offers the largest potential as a renewable fuel. In order to ensure the reliable and sustainable supply of forest fuel new technological solutions to procure forest biomass are needed. By harmonising research methodologies in forest biomass operations research it is anticipated that more solid conclusions can be drawn from research results since the Action  enables more comparable repetitions of the same studies across Europe. Furthermore, research results will be more comparable and the generalisation of research results will be improved. The Action  will provide an original synthesis of multidisciplinary research efforts and an innovative European wide reference for forest biomass for energy terminology, sampling methods, standard measurements, and research methodologies. This synthesis will promote the increase in the use of forest biomass for energy as laid out in the EU strategies. Through the possibilities of the networking concept, the most suitable research methods can be identified, harmonised and standardised throughout the EU. The Action  contributes to provide a more solid basis for the decision making on national and EU levels on biomass supply.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP0902    

 The main objective is to increase understanding of state and potential of forest mitigation and adaptation to climate change in a polluted environment, and to reconcile process-oriented research, long-term monitoring and applied modelling at comprehensive forest research sites. Forests are expected to face significant pressures from climate change and air pollution. The COST Strategic Workshop Forest Ecosystems in a Changing Environment: Identifying Future Monitoring and Research Needs , held in Istanbul in 2008, recommended more integration between approaches and themes in order to assess the risks for European forests. This Action  creates a platform of experts from different fields, with the following main objectives: 1) to increase understanding of state and potential of forest mitigation and adaptation to climate change in a polluted environment; and 2) to reconcile process-oriented research, long-term monitoring and applied modelling at comprehensive forest research sites (Supersites III). Present forest monitoring in Europe is carried out at Level I and II plots by the ICP Forests programme on behalf of the Convention on Long-range Transboundary Air Pollution. Supersites of Level III were proposed in Istanbul, with the main aim of integrating soil, plant and atmospheric sciences and monitoring, and providing policy-oriented modelling with scientifically sound indicators of pollution and climate-related risks.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP0903    

 The main objective of this Action  is to improve the knowledge on wood mechanical and physical behaviour and its chemical degradation during Thermo-Hydro-Mechanical (THM) processing, and its application to wide-ranging wood treatment systems. This Action  will help overcome challenges related to the scaling-up of research findings and full industrial production, optimising processing conditions, improving product properties and developing innovative product ranges from the understanding of THM processing. The polymeric components of wood and its porous structure allow its properties to be modified under the combined effects of temperature, moisture and mechanical action  so-called Thermo-Hydro-Mechanical (THM) treatments. Various types of processing techniques, including high temperature steam with or without an applied mechanical force, can be utilised to enhance wood properties, to produce eco-friendly new materials and to develop new products. During these THM treatments, wood undergoes mechano-chemical transformations, which depend upon the processing parameters and material properties. An investigation of these phenomena requires collaboration between groups from different wood disciplines; however, to date research has been rather fragmented. This COST Action  aims to apply promising techniques in the fields of wood mechanics, wood chemistry and material sciences through an interdisciplinary approach to improve knowledge about the chemical degradation and mechanical behaviour of wood during THM processing. This will help overcome the challenges being faced in scaling-up research findings, as well to improving full industrial production, process improvement and the enhancement of product properties and the development of new products.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP0904    

 The main objective of this Action  is to evaluate and substantiate the scientific knowledge relevant for genetically modified tree (GMT) biosafety protocols by putting together already existing information generated in various European countries as the basis for future EU policy and regulation for the environmental impact assessment and the safe development and practical use of GMTs. The potential for unintended consequences of spread of foreign genes (via vertical or horizontal transfer) and of pleiotropic effects following transgene expression may be enhanced in long-lived forest trees. This Action  will focus on four key aspects related to the biosafety of GMTs: (a) analyses of the efficiency of existing gene containment strategies to avoid or if not possible to minimize gene flow; (b) facilitate efforts to develop site-specific integration of transgenes in tree genomes to minimize variability of transgene expression and pleiotropic effects, (c) evaluate possible methods to monitor GMTs in the whole production chain, and (d) conduct socio-economic and cost/benefit analyses in relation to the use of GMTs in plantations. This Action  combines multidisciplinary knowledge generated with transgenic lines of forest trees (such as, Populus spp., Pinus spp., Eucalyptus spp., Betula spp., Castanea spp., Picea spp., etc.) as well as extensive expertise in correlated topics. The information gained should contribute to strengthen the scientific basis for the execution of the EU policy directives related to transgenic trees intended for cultivation in Europe. The knowledge gained will be summarised in a book as a final output of this Action .       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP0905    

 The question of availability of wood in Europe on a sustainable basis is highly relevant to define global change mitigation strategies and targets for biomass energy as adopted at national and European level, and to support the proposal of an increased use of wood as a post-Kyoto decision. Future scenarios at EU-level highlight a deficit of wood supply compared to wood consumption of 47 Mm3 in 2005, 134 Mm3 in 2010, possibly reaching 436 Mm3 in 2020. Major issues to be clarified are the potential supply of tree biomass, trees outside the forest, and the economic, social and ecological conditions, which will determine the wood supply. This COST Action  aims at improving information and methodologies on the potential sustainable wood supply based on the National Forest Inventories to reduce the given uncertainties. Such harmonised information is urgent to improve the calculation basis for decision makers in the forest, environment, and in the wood and energy sectors.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1001    

 Movements of Invasive Alien Species (IAS) globally by trade and human movement present severe and increasing risks of transfer of plant pests (principally invertebrates and plant pathogens) globally. Climate change adds further opportunities for pest establishment and impact, both by providing increased survival and growth opportunities for pests and, through environmental stresses, making trees more vulnerable to those pests. In relation to ecosystem services and their longevity, forests are particularly vulnerable to IAS. In particular, multiple PATHWAYS for transfer of pests internationally are poorly characterised, leading to increasing transfer and establishment of new damaging organisms. The COST Action  PERMIT addresses this shortfall in knowledge and practice and will focus on reducing threats from exotic pests through promoting ENHANCED PATHWAY MANAGEMENT.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1002    

 Paper and board are made from renewable resources and are low carbon footprint materials, therefore giving them an environmental advantage compared to other materials. However, in packaging applications, paper and board are nearly always used in combination with non renewable materials; e.g. barrier materials derived from oil based plastics or aluminium. To give the forest industry a competitive edge this Action  will focus on packaging solutions based entirely on renewable resources in order to remove the serious disadvantages associated with future paper and board packaging solutions that continue to rely on non renewable materials. The Action  will explore possibilities that the forest itself can offer as a raw material base for different components within a given package, thus exploring the full potential of the fibres. The Action  is an opportunity and a strategic objective for the forest sector value chain and will reduce environmental impact thus making it of potentially great importance for contributing to European policy. To fully understand the benefits it is important to assess the solutions from a sustainability point-of-view taking account of the total packaging value chain. That is why the Action  also addresses research in e.g. value chain efficiency, end-of-life and supply of raw material.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1003    

 Timber and wood-based engineered products are becoming very important as structural materials, especially in the drive towards sustainable technologies and construction. For structural wooden products, it is very important to improve their properties to be more competitive and reliable as a sustainable low-carbon material and a major contributor to affordable buildings. This applies particularly to larger, more complicated structures where timber is becoming a realistic alternative. This Action  aims to boost the performance of structural timber products/construction, thereby improving use of timber in construction in existing and new applications. This includes the enhanced predictability and reliability of timber structures. Improving the mechanical performance of connections and reinforcing timber in weak zones are large-scale research domains in Europe which will require coordination and scientific/engineering approaches. This COST Action  will deliver increased knowledge of improving strengthening, stiffening and toughening techniques, modelling enhanced performance and experience in real projects to create new opportunities for timber construction. Exchanging information will highlight gaps in knowledge and inform future work and potential collaboration between research groups, supporting timber construction and its wider uptake in the European construction industry. This Action  may also create opportunities for patenting possible new technologies and products for reinforcing timber mechanical properties.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1004    

 Competitiveness of pulp and paper industry is challenged dramatically in Europe and North America today. Due to over-capacity in these markets, several production plants have been shut down in the last couple of years. Thus, traditional papermaking as well as new fibre-based products should be developed in order to maintain Europe's leading role in pulp and paper technology. Pulp and paper production is largely determined by fluid dynamics of fibre suspension flows. The objectives of the Action  deal with numerical modelling of fibre suspension flows as well as validation measurements. The Action  will offer industry a forum to solve test cases relevant to industry and to compare simulated results to experiments. Together simulations and experiments will result in more reliable simulation tools to industry. Fibre suspensions are extremely complex solid-liquid systems since their components (fibres, flocs, air bubbles and additives) interact mutually in a complex way. As a consequence of this complexity, the understanding of the suspension flow dynamics remains poor and incomplete, despite of its importance for the papermaking industry. This usually results in conservative design of industrial equipments and leads to low energy efficiency and equipment oversizing. Nowadays fast development of computer techniques and flow simulation methods allows, however, for much more precise predictions of fibre suspensions dynamics. Although it is still a fundamental research area, numerous examples of successful practical applications may be given. Their introduction into industrial practice seems to be the crucial issue for innovative and competitive European papermaking industry. The Action , by gathering together scientists, researchers and practitioners, will help to speed up this process.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1005    

 Many applications of products are determined by their special surface properties, and based on the physical, chemical and biological interchange of various molecules with the materials surface. This is especially true for the use of wood and wood based products due to the special wood characteristics like anisotropy, UV-degradation. Thus, bringing new functions to wood through surface modification is needed in order to enhance the quality of the existing wood products and to open the way to new applications, products or markets. This COST Action  aims to provide the scientific-based framework and knowledge required for enhanced surface modification of wood and wood based products towards higher functionalization and towards fulfillment of higher technical, economic and environmental standards. This will be achieved by working within three main areas: Wood surface modification and functionalization, Wood interface modification and interface interaction and Process and Service life modelling.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1006    

 In recent years, the use of timber in structures has become particularly important, considering that it is the only truly renewable building material and carbon storage. Timber has been used as structural material for centuries and numerous examples demonstrate its durability if properly designed and built and when adequate assessment and monitoring has been applied. The objective of the Action  is to increase the acceptance of timber in the design of new structures and in the repair of old buildings by developing and disseminating methods to assess, reinforce and monitor them. The need for assessment, reinforcement and monitoring of timber structures can arise from multiple motivations such as the expiration of the planned lifetime, materials aging, exceptional incidents, and ever more important, a change of use. The Action  will benefit from multidisciplinary views of the problems and followed innovative solutions by the involved stakeholders, enable synergies between them and provide an effective way of discussing and disseminating the results from ongoing projects within this research area to the European industry. The Action  will increase the confidence of designers, authorities and end-users in the safe, durable and efficient use of timber and consequently increase its use in construction.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1101    

 Dothistroma needle blight is an economically important tree disease caused by two fungal pathogens, Dothistroma septosporum  and Dothistroma pini . Although the disease has been a problem in the southern hemisphere for many years, only recently has it caused significant damage to plantations and natural forest ecosystems in Europe. The biosecurity implications relating to this recent upsurge are unclear, and this has raised a number of important questions: Are these fungi recently introduced, or is it that they are changing in behaviour, possibly due to changing climatic conditions? Alternatively, is the dramatic increase in disease intensity and geographical and host range due to the introduction of more aggressive strains? Is this situation likely to worsen, or maybe improve under future management and climate change scenarios? What are the most suitable management strategies? This Action , DIAROD, plans to build on the foundations of the International Dothistroma Alliance (IDA), established in 2006 to help combat the new problems faced due to this disease. The aim of the DIAROD cost Action  is  to synthesize knowledge, encourage collaborative research to address the key questions, determine future research priorities, and use the resulting information to develop management strategies applicable to this evolving disease and other future disease threats.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1102    

 Currently, severe dieback of Fraxinus spp. is observed in most European countries. This is an emerging disease, which results in massive tree mortality, threatening the existence of Fraxinus over the continent. It is caused by Hymenoscyphus pseudoalbidus , alien and invasive fungus, origin of which remains unknown. Currently, many European countries have national research programs on Fraxinus  dieback, focusing on numerous aspects of the biology and ecology of the disease, but the activities are scattered. Aim of the FRAXBACK is, through sharing and synthesis of available knowledge, generate comprehensive understanding of Fraxinus  dieback phenomenon, and to elaborate state of the art practical guidelines for sustainable management of Fraxinus  in Europe. The Action  will be implemented through innovative interdisciplinary approach, and will include forest pathologists, tree breeders and silviculturists. Its deliverables: i) guidelines for sustainable management of Fraxinus  in Europe; ii) European database for dieback-resistant Fraxinus genotypes/families/populations and established/planned progeny trials; iii) illustrated digests/leaflets/brochures on Fraxinus dieback; iv) disease distribution maps; v) website; vi) book. FRAXBACK is comprised of four Working Groups: WG1 Pathogen; WG2 Host; WG3 Silviculture; WG4 Dissemination and knowledge gaps. Its duration is 4 years, including two MC / WG  meetings and four STSMs per year, and one international conference.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1103    

 The goal of this Action  is to promote discussion on the benefits that may be achieved from novel combinations of print and digital. It will also be used to enhance innovations that will make use of the benefits of both print and electronic media as well as innovations where print and electronic media are combined. Several examples exist where successful combinations have been achieved e.g. through the use of image recognition, augmented reality or printed electronics to bring interactivity into fiber based products. To give the forest industry a competitive edge this Action  will focus on new innovations by combining knowledge of the end users with most recent technological achievements. New models of ongoing change in social interaction and in the cultural products of paper and electronic media will be elaborated and proposed. The results will promote critical and theoretical discussion on the changing meanings of contemporary media culture. The Action  will explore new business opportunities for the fiber based products and the value chains of print media and packaging through novel, innovative uses. It will also serve as a channel for communication between industry and academia, thus contributing to the development of new commercial applications.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1104    

 The primary objective of the Action  is to build knowledge and understanding of fundamental physical (self assembly) processes and biological systems (e.g. genetic control) that drive natural structures and biopolymer composition within the plant/wood cell wall and to use new knowledge of self assembly processes to support the development of new biopolymer based materials. The Action  also aims to quantify the impact of new knowledge on our understanding of the mechanical properties of the cell wall and how processes such as pulping, bleaching recycling, cell wall disintegration methods and ongoing tree improvement and biotechnology programmes impact both positively and negatively on structure and composition of the cell wall.  The intent is to explore how this knowledge can be used to support ongoing improvement in these areas of activity.   An overarching goal is to develop multidisciplinary competence and capability to support these objectives and to work closely with commercial organisations to promote effective dissemination of knowledge and the development of a more economically sustainable Forest Based Sector.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1105    

 Climate change and subsequent increase in frequency and intensity of extreme climatic events will affect vitality, production and wood quality of European trees. STREeSS is based on the enormous potential of dendro-sciences (including Dendrochronology, Wood anatomy and Ecophysiology) to study effects of extreme events such as drought, heat waves, late frost and flooding on tree performance and wood formation. Within these disciplines impacts on tree growth are currently assessed in a range of field studies and experiments among European countries, in both field and laboratory conditions. Research focus differs from cell to landscape with a temporal scale from minutes to millennia and sites ranging from extreme hot and dry to cold and wet environments. At the current stage it is crucial to integrate knowledge conducted in the different disciplines to generate a basic understanding of short to long-term physiological responses of tree species and provenances to extreme climate conditions. By linking scientific expertise and facilitate data exchange and organisation as well as harmonization of methodologies STREeSS will form a platform for pushing frontiers between the disciplines forward. This will strengthen the scientific basis for a sound species and provenance selection as well as for an sustainable management of European forests.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1106    

 Forest ownership is changing across Europe. In some areas a growing number of so-called new  forest owners hold only small parcels, have no agricultural or forestry knowledge and no capacities or interest to manage their forests, while in others new community and private owners are bringing fresh interest and new objectives to woodland management. This diversity and change creates implementation problems for forest-related policies including biodiversity conservation, timber and renewable energy supply, climate change mitigation, or recreation. The objectives of the proposed Action  are: (1)    To analyse attitudes and constraints of different forest owner types in Europe and the ongoing changes (outputs: literature survey, meta-analyses and maps). (2)    To explore innovative management approaches for new forest owner types (outputs: case studies, critical assessment). (3)    To study effective policy instruments with a comparative analysis approach (outputs: literature survey, case studies, policy analyses). (4)    To draw conclusions and recommendations for forest-related policies, forest management practice, further education and future research. The interdisciplinary work will be done in close cooperation with relevant public and private stakeholders. A COST Action  is suited for the strongly needed but still lacking comprehensive European overview and analyses.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1201    

 Marginal/peripheral (MaP) forest populations are at the edges of species ranges and contain an original genetic diversity due to unsuitable conditions for survival. Studying adaptive processes in MaP populations is crucial and of mutual interest for European and non-European countries for understanding the future of forest ecosystems. Developing conservation and management strategies for Forest Genetic Resources (FGR) of MaP populations is needed to adapt European forests to Global Change. Because of their millennia-long history of adaptation to environmental changes, FGR growing in southern Europe may prove invaluable for adapting the European forestry sector. However southern MaP populations are not only threatened by ongoing climate change but also by other disturbances arising from human activities. Southern Europe represents an ideal model where the effects of climate change on FGR will be stronger and more rapid than in the rest of Europe. This proposal, with its broad research spectrum and partnership, addresses the conservation and management of MaP FGR by: (i) compiling information on climate change impacts on MaP populations, (ii) making information available for preparing national and pan-European forest plans and strategies for adaptation and mitigation , (iii) developing criteria for monitoring and conserving FGR and (iv) sharing results with forest managers.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1202    

 Non-wood forest products (NWFPs) have important commercial, environmental, social and recreational roles in many European forests. They also have a relevant place in the multifunctional sustainable forest management (MSFM) paradigm, being the main source of income from forests in several regions. Although the importance of NWFPs is recognised and accepted, forest research remains mainly focussed on timber production. Consequently knowledge about European NWFPs is comparatively scarce, as is research on their ecology, management and economics, required to optimize sustainable simultaneous production of different products from forests. It is proposed that a multidisciplinary European network on NWFPs will help to bridge these gaps. In this context, the main goal of the Action  is to build a broad multidisciplinary network of European NWFPs researchers and managers, to review the current state of the art, highlight existing innovation, share information and experience, identify research topics, seek research synergies and by increasing the European-wide theoretical and practical understanding of NWFPs, promote their sustainable management.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1203    

 Green Infrastructure (GI) has recently gained prominence as a planning tool at regional and local levels. GI provides a range of ecosystem services, and new initiatives can build on state-of-the-art research and on delivery mechanisms such as urban forestry (UF). However, greater attention is needed on integrating the environmental and social benefits produced, particularly in the context of climate change adaptation and mitigation. The COST Action  aims to: 1) increase the understanding of the role of UF in the context of GI from a scientific and a socio-economic perspective, in terms of the ecosystem services provided to people and to the urban environment; 2) to identify priorities and challenges for future research in the field; 3) to provide indicators and/or thresholds to be included by policy makers in local, national or international regulations about GI and UF; 4) to develop guidelines for GI planners and managers on how to implement GI approaches with an emphasis on linking the environmental and social services of UF. Undertaking a COST Action  on this topic is crucial because of the diversity of GI and UF approaches at European level and because of the need to create a structured interaction among scientists, citizens, policy makers and managers       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1204    

 Demand for high performance products is increasing globally, as is the demand for more environmentally responsible sourcing. The combination of these facts places significant strain on traditional material supplies and processing. Fibre demand  and nanocellulose are two such area of increasing demand, where diversification of fibre supplies is necessary to provide the demands and allow use of land for agricultural food purposes and biorefinery / biofuel supply. One area where fibre supply is increasing in supply is through the wood industry. This is through greater forest reserves under sustainable forestry practices, especially across Europe. However, it is necessary to think outside the box  on how this resource can be put to optimum value (i.e. in areas in addition to construction, pulp  paper and bioenergy). This Action  aims to develop the sustainable emerging technologies in the areas of textile fibre production, cellulosic fibres, and the various forms of nanocellulose derived solely from wood. This advancement needs to be undertaken within a COST framework not only to provide a means of information sharing, but to educate and train scientists in new areas of development. Through a programme of collaboration and knowledge exchange and training, this Action  will develop a pan-European leap in capabilities, product and processes. This will lead to an improvement in the environmental credentials of advanced cellulose-based materials, strengthening R D and innovative material production across Europe.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1205    

 Structure, dynamics and functioning of admixtures of tree species is a research topic of increasing relevance across Europe. The reason is that it is frequently suggested that mixed forests present (i) more resistance and resilience to human or non human disturbances, (ii) higher biodiversity levels (iii) higher carbon storage capacity and thus higher potential for mitigation strategies, (iv) better adaptation strategies to global change, and (v) higher productivity and support for ecosystem services. To date, these features have been studied separately for different mixtures of species, management practices and specific growing conditions. Consequently, the knowledge gained is local and a common and lasting European perspective on mixed forest sustainable management has yet to be developed. EuMIXFOR aims at creating a European research network on mixed forests, which can contribute to the increase of knowledge of adaptive forestry, the sustainability of management and the conservation and improvement of mixed forests to support rural development . The accomplishment of the objectives and the development and innovation activities involved in this Action  will result in the definition of silvicultural recommendations that will help decision makers to promote the social, economic and environmental functions of European mixed forests.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1206    

 When preparing forest-related policies, the multilevel and multi-stakeholder governance make it challenging to foresee their economic, social and environmental impacts. To coordinate and streamline the development and implementation of forest-related policy targets and measures at different levels and sectors, new means for policy analyses should be developed.  Based on the recent advances in sociology, policy science, economics, and quantitative modelling this Action  aims: i) to analyse how different forest-related targets have been and could be implemented at supranational, national and sub-national level; ii) to enhance the use of models for integrated policy analysis; and iii) to develop new methodologies and related good practices for the orchestration of policy modelling and analyses. COST will facilitate multinational, transdisciplinary collaboration between sociologists, policy scientists, economists and modellers as well as active interaction with various stakeholders. Especially in the context of Europe 2020, post-2013 Rural Development Policy and other relevant policies, the Action  will support the coherence of policy targets and efficiency of policy measures. The generated new knowledge can be used by European policy and decision makers to adjust forest-related policies and their implementation to the requirements of multilevel and multi-stakeholder governance.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1207    

 Coppicing is a very traditional way of forest management. It benefits from the natural (vegetative) regeneration of mostly broadleaf species and their fast growth in the first decades. In most cases situated close to settlements this silvicultural regime provided among others firewood, bark, fruits and grazing and by this supported the livelihood of the rural population. Until the middle of the 20 th  century, coppice forests were very common in most parts of Europe. With increase in use of non-renewable raw materials, coppice lost importance and was neglected or converted. Only recently coppice has been re-discovered because of its adaptive ecology, its stability and multiple benefits, notably its protection function, contribution to biodiversity and as a source of renewable bioenergy. Traditional coppice management is often combined with special ownership and user rights regimes (e. g. commons) and this governance regime may be also an interesting alternative for small scale forestry and/or modern  short rotation coppice (SRC) which is established on former agriculture land. The Action  aims to bring together European scientists, experts and young scholars to exchange knowledge about coppice forestry and to start developing innovative management and utilization concepts/techniques for future modern multifunctional coppice management systems.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1301    

 This Action  aims to combine forces and to foster research on wooden musical instruments in order to preserve and develop the dissemination of knowledge on musical instruments in Europe through inter disciplinary research. The proposed program involves curators and conservators on the one side, wood scientists, chemists and acousticians on the other side, and finally, researchers in organology and making of instruments. As part of the CIMCIM (International Committee of Musical Instrument Museums and Collections) network, working with some members of the former WoodCultHer Action  IE0601 and with makers, the project will integrate study, conservation and preservation works on musical instruments in heritage, and will allow the different European teams working on wood to participate in research projects on musical instruments. The collaboration will help to develop cooperative programs on specific projects about the study and identification of artefacts and about the conservation of musical instruments.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1302    

 Maintaining and expanding the market potential for bio-based building products in indoor and outdoor construction uses remains a key activity for European industry in the forestry and biotechnological sector. Performance data for many "environmental friendly" building materials are lacking as well as suitable comprehensive test methodologies to determine their resistance against mould, stain, and decay. The similarity in terms of decay hazard, resulting response on climatic loads and thus performance of different bio-based building materials has not yet been recognised adequately, wherefore this Action  will provide a platform for networking and scientific exchange between different disciplines, such as material sciences, wood technology, biology, biotechnology, building physics and engineering. Consumer demands and preferences, which might serve as limit states to develop service life prediction and performance models, will consider aesthetical aspects as well as the functionality of building assemblies. A coordinated effort to put the issue of biodegradability of organic building products on the agenda will contribute to the control and prevention of this imminent threat to use bio-based building materials, which in turn could severely damage a pan-European low carbon building agenda.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1303    

 Changes in climate, environment and management are altering the world s ecosystems. Forests are of particular importance in this context due to the significant economic, ecological and cultural services they provide. Projecting changes of these services for the next decades is crucial for a concerted European response to environmental change. There are a number of challenges to meet. Mechanistic forest models that can be extrapolated to new environmental conditions are still associated with considerable predictive uncertainty. The reasons are the lack of harmonized datasets at larger scales and the difficulty to obtain robust methods for parameterisation, evaluation and model comparison that make optimal use of the range of available data types and sources. PROFOUND addresses these problems by: 1) suggesting ways to harmonize and integrate European forest data for model projections 2) comparing forest modelling approaches in terms of scale, processes captured, data requirements and predictive uncertainty 3) developing standards for (Bayesian) model parameterisation, calibration, evaluation and comparison, and 4) facilitating probabilistic multi-model projections under climatic change.  As a result, PROFOUND will strengthen the integration of forest modellers and data-providing experts across Europe and provide more reliable information about the uncertainty of model predictions to decision makers.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1304    

 European forests are of immense importance to both society and the environment, providing a range of products and ecosystem services many of which are threatened by climate change. Our understanding of forest diversity, especially belowground, is currently limited and spread over distinct trophic levels. Little is known about the redundancy and functional diversity in forest soils. Numerous factors threaten existing belowground biodiversity, the simplification of forest ecosystems in pursuit of higher productivity being one of the prominent ones. There is an urgent need to link up existing scientific expertise at different levels to fully explain the connection between diversity, stability and function. Concurrently, forest modelling lacks coordinated activity aimed at bringing biodiversity into the fold - current emphasis is on yield and forest gap models. Elsewhere, food web models and ecosystem network models are well developed, but their application to forests is limited. This COST Action  will provide a forum where current understanding of functional belowground biodiversity in European forests will be synthesised and its role communicated in a form suitable for modellers, policy makers and end-users.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1305    

 Scientists are prompted to seek alternative methodologies for the production of materials, fuels and chemicals using low environmental impact technologies and greener methodologies with comparable efficiencies to those currently available in view of the expected resource scarcity and future oil economy. Lignocellulosic residues can constitute a highly promising (and currently largely under-utilised) feedstock with a significant potential to be converted into useful end products. However, a joint multidisciplinary effort from several disciplines including (bio)chemistry, biology, (bio)chemical and biological engineering, forest products sciences as well as environmental sciences and experts in economic assessment in liaison with industry is required to appropriately address the efficient transformation of such residues. The main objective of this Action  is to develop a solid European multidisciplinary network able to provide a range of innovative alternatives to the valorisation of lignocellulosic residues to chemicals, fuels and materials making use of environmentally sound protocols from pretreatment/fractionation to conversion to valuable end products. Thus, this Action  will bridge gaps between academic disciplines as well as between academia and industry by bringing together skills and expertise that cross scientific borders interconnecting different technology hubs across Europe, overcoming technological barriers, going beyond current lignocellulosic waste exploitation/management approaches.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1306    

 The international trade in live plants is a major pathway for the introduction of invasive tree pests and pathogens, resulting in environmental and economic damage. Many recently introduced pests and diseases were not known to be harmful, or unknown to science, and were not regulated before they invaded, indicating that the current system to identify harmful species does not provide sufficient protection from invasions by alien pests and pathogens. A novel way of identifying potentially harmful organisms for regulation is by monitoring European trees planted in regions that export plants to Europe. The Action  will 1) establish a global network of scientists and regulators in countries where sentinel nurseries could be established from seed or where there are botanical gardens or arboreta with exotic trees, 2) develop common protocols for the monitoring and identification of pests and 3) explore ways to regulate the establishment of such nurseries and the use of data collected through them. This Action  will also bring together detailed information about the international trade in trees and the environmental value of native trees in Europe. The Action  will produce written, electronic and workshop outputs, as well as at least five short-term scientific missions per year.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1401    

 In the last two decades, the basis of scientific knowledge in timber engineering has developed immensely. The documented results, however, are inhomogeneous and fragmented and do not provide timber engineering community with the relevant information to prove the reliable and safe application of newly developed wood products in construction. The aim of the Action  is to overcome the gap between broadly available scientific results and the specific information needed by designers, industry, authorities and code committees, providing transfer for practical application in timber design and innovation. This will be achieved by the coordination, consolidation, harmonization and dissemination of recent efforts in research and development that aim at enhancing existing or deriving new methods and design rules for timber structures. The results of this Action  will increase the confidence of code-writers, authorities, designers and end-users in the safe, durable and efficient use of timber in structures and consequently increase its acceptance and use in the design of buildings.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1402    

 The management of tree species non-native to European geographical regions has a long tradition within forestry management practice. Their introduction to Europe (initially focussed on growing tree species) dates back to the 18th century when enormous demands were being made on natural resources to sustain the on-going industrialization of Europe. Today issues of biomass production and C sequestration as well as the question of whether these species could increase the adaptive capacity of forests to long-term climate change patterns have fuelled a growing interest in non-native tree species in Europe. In order to determine their fullest potential (and associated management options, but also assess associated risks and challenges) the need for a communication platform - allowing for discussions with stakeholder groups from within and beyond European borders; is argued.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1403    

 Bio-based building products have a very long history, e.g. as timber structural members. Combustibility was the main reason why bio-based building materials were banned from many applications. When performance based design (PBD) became possible many building regulations opened the market for bio-based building products. However, large differences between regulations in countries exist and the use of combustible building products is still very limited.  Modern living offers attractive, flexible buildings and aims for cost efficient building techniques. Sustainability of building products became an issue. Consumers demand renewable products; however the Fire Safety of the end-product has to remain on a high level. Fire Safety Engineering (FSE) has achieved large acceptance in the recent years. FSE allows a PBD with customized building solutions. However, the available techniques are often limited to non-combustible materials. During the last decade the portfolio of building products made from bio-based raw materials has increased enormously. The material properties affecting a possible fire development vary which has been confirmed in many development projects including European researchers. This Action  wants to create a platform for networking, exchange and collection of performance data, experiences, authority- and climate requirements which affect the design with respect to the Fire Safe Use of Bio-based Building Products. By systematically organisation knowledge in this area will advance at a significant higher rate. The Action  will Exchange researchers, organize Workshop and create comprehensive dissemination material.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1404    

 Research and development of new fibre-based packaging materials with active and intelligent features have shown huge potential to optimise the supply chain, and increase the shelf-life of foodstuff and enhance consumer consciousness of food utilisation. Very few of the potential solutions have, however, been able to reach the market. This Action  aims to identify and focus on the key technical, social, economic and legislative factors relevant for a successful deployment of renewable fibre-based functional packaging solutions. This will be achieved by conducting research and development into active and intelligent packaging, encompassing both scientific and technical solutions, addressing the opportunities for, and obstacles to, market introduction. The innovative approach of this Action  lies in the sharp focus on the integration of active and intelligent solutions in papermaking in order to create next-generation functional fibre-based packaging. The Action  will achieve the objectives by providing an open multidisciplinary platform for the complete paper and board packaging value chain and aims at strong involvement of industrial partners throughout Europe. Sustainable fibre-based packaging materials with new and active functionalities may help to introduce new products on the market with higher value and profits for paper and board manufacturers than traditional products.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1405    

 Gibberella circinata  is a highly virulent pathogen damaging pines, causing damping-off in nurseries and pitch canker in forests. It was first detected in North America, since when the pathogen has spread into Central and South America, South Africa, Asia and, more recently, Europe. G. circinata  is now considered the most important pathogen affecting Pinus  seedlings and mature trees in many countries globally; asymptomatic seedlings may be planted out, resulting in very serious losses in forests. Nevertheless, there has been little research on G. circinata  in Europe to date and little information is available overall on host range in Europe, pathogen spread and disease control. The main aim of this Action  is to establish a European-focused network to increase knowledge of the biology, ecology and pathways of spread of G. circinata , to examine the potential for the development of effective and environmentally-friendly prevention and mitigation strategies and to deliver these outcomes to stakeholders and policy makers. To that end, a multidisciplinary approach will be taken, including researchers, forest managers and policy makers from (initially) 27 countries focused on the common problem of pitch canker, making PINESTRENGTH highly innovative.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1406    

 The forest-based sector can become a leader in achieving the European Commission s ambitious target of reducing CO 2  emissions with innovative production technologies, reduced energy consumption, increased wood products recycling, and reuse. Apart from these undoubted environmental benefits, the use of forest products in long life products, such as built environment applications, allows for the possibility of extended storage of atmospheric carbon dioxide. Wood modification (chemical, thermal, impregnation) is an assortment of the innovative processes currently being adopted. Though many aspects of these treatments are known, the fundamental influence of the process on product performance, the environment, and end of life scenarios remain unknown. It is essential to integrate interactive assessment of process parameters, developed product properties, and environmental impacts. To optimize modification processing to minimize environmental impacts, much more information must be gathered about all process related factors affecting the environment (VOC, energy use, end of life use, etc.). This Action  will investigate modification processing and products design with emphasis on their environmental impacts. This will require analysis of the whole value chain, from forest through processing, installation, in-service, end of life, second/third life (cascading) and ultimately incineration with energy recovery.       Forests, their Products and Services COST Action FP1407    

 New trends changing the structuring and functioning of the public sector are observed. Specialization within large bureaucracies results in the establishment of autonomous agencies, urging stricter coordination of policy sectors and governmental levels, and new ways of contract-based result control. Although governments are adapting to these trends at an increasing pace, there remains lack of scientific proof of the beneficial effects of these trends for the performance of the public sector. Most research efforts suffer from a lack of internationally comparative data, longitudinal data, and ill-concerted research methods. This Action  resolves these drawbacks by bringing together scholars on a European platform for comparative and longitudinal research, which will lead to empirical, theoretical and methodological advancements in the field. Also, results that are grounded in scientific research will inspire policy-relevant recommendations to guide decision-makers in their policies on the organization of the public sector. Keywords : Public sector organization. Trends and reforms. Autonomy, steering, performance, accountability and coordination. Policy relevance and practitioner-oriented. International, dynamic and combined methods.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS0601    

 The ILDC Action  aims to provide access to domestic case law concerning international law and to enhance understanding of its relevance for domestic and international law. A proper understanding of international law requires knowledge of the role of domestic jurisdictions. Until now, access to domestic case law has been limited. Many cases are unpublished, few translated into English, and even if they are available, their effects may not be fully understood without explanations about the underlying domestic legal system. ILDC will create a network of reporters and researchers who will analyse domestic cases and conduct research on the internationalisation of law and its development in domestic jurisdictions. ILDC aims to: - Make available judgments of domestic courts on matters of international law, where necessary to translate these judgments and to explain the domestic legal frameworks that produced them. - Feature in-depth commentaries written by a network of legal experts. - Inform and educate stakeholders about the domestic application of international law. - Analyse the larger consequences for international law. - Disseminate information to a wider audience. Keywords : Courts, Globalisation, International law, Interaction between international and domestic law, Law.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS0602    

 The recent increase in the numbers of migrants in Europe has generated a growing volume of research on their state of health and the need to adapt care services to their needs. Scientific progress in this field, however, is held up by a lack of interdisciplinary and international collaboration. Moreover, the addition of a cross-national perspective can yield new insights into the causes of ill-health and can further the exchange of good practices. In Southern, Central and Eastern European Countries, work on migration and health is in particular need of strengthening and encouragement. This Action  will bring together an international group of experts to consolidate and review work carried out so far, identify blind spots and persistent problems, and recommend ways forward. Its three Working Groups will be concerned with social and policy factors, migrants' state of health, and improvements in service delivery. The Action  will produce 'state of the art' reports on the most urgent themes and will organise workshops, conferences, joint publications and training activities to discuss and disseminate its findings. Keywords : Migrants, ethnic minorities, refugees, health care, social care.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS0603    

 Based on the understanding that investment in research, development and innovation is a major driver of long-term economic performance, policy-makers in Europe have an urgent need for evidence-based policy recommendations that promote appropriate strategies for the governance, incentives and conduct of scientific research and of the knowledge transfer between public and private entities. The main objective of the Action  is to improve our understanding of the process of scientific and technological development and of the transfer of scientific and technological developments to markets and into economic development. A critical mass of established and young researchers will be brought together to shed light on these issues and to develop policy recommendations. Furthermore, the Action  will improve the collection, harmonization and provision of micro data and will thereby make a lasting contribution to science and technology research. The research is organized into four Working Groups: science, technology and knowledge creation; diffusion of science and technology; intellectual property rights; development of markets. Keywords : Research and development, technological development, knowledge transfer, intellectual property rights, economic performance.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS0604    

 The goal of ECONTEL is to develop a strategic research and training network linking key individuals and organizations in order to enhance Europes competence in the field of telecommunications economics, to support related R D-initiatives, and to provide guidelines and recommendations to European players (end-users, enterprises, operators, regulators, policy makers, content providers) concerning the provision to citizens and enterprises of new converged broadband and wireless content delivery networks. ECONTEL coordinates the development of research methodologies and tools from engineering, media and business research. Regulatory issues helping or hindering the adoption of economically efficient services are identified. ECONTEL mobilizes the critical mass and diversity of economists, business research experts, engineers, and scientists working in communications and content economics. Keywords : Communications, Media; Economics, Business Models, Regulations and Tariffs.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS0605    

 1. Main/primary objectives The main objective of the Action  is to enhance international collaboration to produce cross-country comparative research using improved data to study the firm-level sources of economic growth and the consequences of the growth process for workers. 2. Secondary objectives Stimulate international collaboration and widen the network to more participants, including earlystage and under-represented researchers (through conferences and workshops: 2 conferences expected, one in Year 1, the other in Year 3; 8-12 workshops expected in Years 2 and 4). Use firm-level data to analyze the microeconomic sources of economic growth and the consequences for workers (through publications of books and working papers: 2-4 books and 40-60 papers anticipated). Bring together academic researchers with policy makers and data providers from National Statistical Institutions (with expected proportions: 50%, 20%, 30%). Share of data and econometric methodologies among researchers. Share methods of data collection, variable definition, and access and confidentiality among data providers. Work to include and mentor junior researchers and to improve the gender balance (with the goal of at least 50% early stage and at least 33% women). Develop the capacity of new member states, East European, and former Soviet economies to produce high quality firm-level data and the scholarly abilities to analyze them. Draw out policy implications of the research wherever possible and encouraging participants to publish such implications (20-40 policy briefs expected). Encourage interdisciplinarity in recognition of the multi-faceted nature of the economic and social problems addressed in this research (sociologists, political scientists, demographers, geographers, and representatives of industry to be invited to the Conferences and Working Groups).       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS0701    

 The main objective of the Action  is to increase and consolidate knowledge of the ongoing process of institutional, structural, and procedural reforms of the United Nations human rights system, so as to recommend standpoints for the European Union in this process working towards strengthening the protection of human rights world-wide. The United Nations is involved in the promotion of human rights in a number of areas, particularly through the Office of the High Commissioner on Human Rights and the newly established Human Rights Council. The European Union has great interest in the outcome of the reforms underway in both these central institutions. These include the building up of a totally new institution of universal periodic review and the ambitious reform of the human rights treaty bodies system. However, the new political power balance in the Council and the existing dangers to a fundamental reform of the treaty body system pose far-reaching challenges to the role of and contribution by the EU. This Action  deals with a concrete and topical issue of great importance for EU internal and external policy in an important area. It is moreover an Action  with an innovative central component: strengthen the treaty body system with the establishment of a world court of human rights. Keywords: European Union, United Nations; Human Rights Reform, United Nations, Human Rights Council, Universal Periodic Review, Human Rights Indicators, High Commissioner for Human Rights, UN Treaty Body System, World Court of Human Rights, EU Development Co-operation, Rights Based Approach, Partnership Approaches       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS0702    

 The main objective of the Action  is to improve our understanding of how written production is mastered and how this learning process can be made more effective for each and every European citizen, especially children at school and adults in the workplace. It is mainly through writing that knowledge is created and shared across boundaries of culture. A key objective is to improve our understanding of how written production is mastered and how this learning process can be made more effective for each and every European citizen, especially children at school and adults in the workplace. Given the diversity of educational systems and languages, it is important to build a common multidisciplinary research programme, sharing theoretical, methodological and educational resources. This research programme needs to focus on four complementary areas: "Early acquisition of writing skills", "Improvements in written communication", "Design of written documents" and "Technological advances in writing tools". By bringing together European research teams that are already working on the topic of writing - or are intending to do so -, the COST Action  will support the building of an active and open network sustained by regular scientific events, research meetings and junior researchers' training. This research network will provide a means of disseminating recommendations throughout European society (schools, universities, workplace) in order to help professionals and citizens write, learn to write and teach writing more effectively within their particular cultural context, as well to communicate across cultural boundaries through writing. Keywords: Writing skills, Mother tongue, Second/foreign language, Digital tool technology, Classroom teaching, Workplace/Professional writing       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS0703    

 The main objective of the Action  is to produce a roadmap or manual conceptualizing the development of a technical infrastructure for collaborative digital preparing, editing, publishing, analyzing and visualizing of literary research materials. There is a great need for international cooperation in the development of tools for scholarly digital editing and analysis of literary material. Research groups from individual institutes exchange research results through conferences and journals and report on their methodological advances, but these results and advances often cannot be scientifically verified or tested because the used hardware and software is not available to or easy to use by other researchers. A shared technical infrastructure for the preparation, editing, publishing, analysis and visualization of literary material does not exist. This Action  aims to form an international Management Committee of researchers that have a thorough experience in electronic editing and digital text analysis for scholarly purposes in a national context. A series of meetings will be called for researchers in the field of literary research and information technology to meet on the topic of a shared supranational networked infrastructure for digital scholarly editing and analysis. The Action  will deliver a roadmap for the implementation of such an infrastructure. Keywords: tools development, interoperability, usability, scholarly cooperation and collaboration, scholarly digital infrastructure.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS0704    

 Cyberbullying refers to bullying and harassment of others by means of new electronic technologies, primarily mobile phones and the internet. There has been much research and action on traditional forms of bullying in schools, with some success, but cyberbullying has arisen and increased in the last few years. Researchers, pupils, parents, teachers, unions, and local, regional and national authorities, are all in various ways starting to grapple with the issues involved in cyberbullying, in consultation with mobile phone companies and internet service providers. There are also positive uses of new technologies for relationships in schools; for example, using a school intranet for peer support services. This COST Action  aims at sharing expertise on cyberbullying in educational settings, and coping with negative and enhancing positive uses of new technologies. This will be done across a wide range of COST countries, though Working Groups, three Workshops, a final Conference, and exchange of personnel, especially early career researchers; and involving all the stakeholders listed above.  Keywords: Bullying, Harassment, Internet, Mobile phones, Schools       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS0801    

 Governance for sustainability is one of the great current challenges for political decision-makers, in Europe and beyond. The vital question for European societies is to design effective, stable and legitimate governance systems at local, national and international levels that can ensure a co-evolution of nature and human societies under the overarching goal of sustainable development. This is the starting point of this Action  on Transformation of Global Environmental Governance. The Action  addresses the current transformation of global environmental governance that can be described as (i) increasing trans-nationalisation, that is, the growing relevance of public and private actors beyond national governments; (ii) increasing supra- and trans-governmentalisation, that is, growing relevance of transnational and supranational institutions; and (iii) increasing fragmentation, that is, increasing segmentation of the policy process through additional layers of decision-making and parallel regulatory systems. However, these transformations are not sufficiently understood. This Action  is designed to address this situation as it focuses on the causes and consequences of the transformation of global environmental governance as well as on its effectiveness, legitimacy and robustness. This Action  will also increase the ability of policy-makers, business representatives and civil society to understand and influence current environmental governance. Keywords: global environmental governance, transformation of environmental politics, non-state actors, effectiveness and legitimacy of new institutions, segmentation and institutional interplay       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS0802    

 The significance of the eastern borders of Europe is currently changing. Through a focus on the informal, everyday aspects of this, the Action  draws together existing knowledge and develops new understandings of the combined social, moral and material elements of how these borders are experienced and thought about. Its aim is to develop a new approach for studying changes in the Eastern periphery of Europe, through: (a) exploring the process through which borders themselves become visible and meaningful (or disappear), rather than take borders for granted and then study their effects; (b) a simultaneous focus on what borders separate and what they bring together; (c) a focus on 'remaking borders,' which means studying understandings of possible futures as well as the past; (d) a focus on money, gender and sexuality, which in both empirical and conceptual terms brings together material, political, social and moral aspects of border-making and allows the study of 'border transgressions.' Unusually, this Action  draws together researchers focusing on the north-east (Baltics and environs) to the south-east (Balkans and environs); and it also combines empirical with conceptual specialists to tackle the complexities of what happens in everyday, informal terms around border regions during periods of transformation.  Keywords: Remaking Borders, North-Eastern Europe, South-Eastern Europe, Gender and Sexuality, Money, Time       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS0803    

 The main objective of this Action  is to profile bilingual Specific Language Impairment (SLI)by establishing a network to coordinate research on linguistic and cognitive abilities of bilingual children with SLI across different migrant communities.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS0804    

 The main objective is to gather together European researchers and experts so they can share their findings and knowledge in order to contribute to the elaboration of an EU common policy on Multilateral Peace Operations. The Action  aims to: a) make a contribution to the effectiveness and coherence of the European policy-making process launched by political leaders and civil society; b) improve awareness among European citizens of the EU s role in Peace Operations.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS0805    

 The main objective of the Action  is to increase the material preconditions and the scholarly competence for analyzing variations in the effectiveness of electoral democracy in Europe across countries and over time. Preconditions will be strengthened by the identification, adaption and integration of the variety of national specific data bases on electoral behaviour. Theoretical and methodological capabilities will be improved by the provision of recurring training opportunities for young scholars as well as the organisation of regular scientific exchange of all scholars involved about the findings of the comparative analyses.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS0806    

 The primary objective of the Action  is to increase and deepen knowledge about living and working in the surveillance age, in order to better understand the consequences and impacts of enhanced surveillance, and subsequently to make recommendations about its future governance and practice.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS0807    

 The main objective of the Action  is to create a strong collaborative international Research Network and to produce a Road Map outlining future systematic collaborative research in European women s literary history. The historiography of literature needs renewal. In particular women s contribution to European literary practice can and must be accounted for in a much more adequate way than current literary histories do. This COST Action  lays the foundations for an innovative European-scale approach to this problem. The neglect of women as cultural agents is indeed an international phenomenon, directly relating to gender inequality in modern societies. International cooperation is needed in order to change things and demonstrate that women s growing presence, since the Middle Ages, prepared the way for their massive entrance into the literary field  (Bourdieu) during the 20th century. Using recent theoretical insights (Moretti, Hutcheon, Vald s) and new technological means, the Action  will prepare avenues for collective research by organizing a strong network of European (and other) researchers. At the end of the Action  the network will be ready to carry out a large European research programme that contributes to a more balanced picture of  western and eastern  Europe s cultural heritage).       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS0901    

 The main objective of the Action  is to provide comprehensive documentation and state of the art analysis of the current Subprime Crisis and its consequences. What started as a burst of a speculation bubble in the US real estate market has developed into the most severe financial crisis since the Great Depression. Characteristic of the Subprime Crisis was the tight connection between the American real estate credit market and the structures and processes of global markets. The slicing and dicing of subprime was made possible by modern financial instruments like derivates, modern practices like securitization, and new actors like Credit Rating Agencies who provided first class ratings and thereby suggested what turned out to be false security, and Hedge funds that generated demand. The crisis is therefore as much a crisis of the modern capitalist system as it is of finance. It has led to greater transformation of the American and European financial markets than any planned reform. Discursively, the crisis has challenged core ideas of monetarism and led to a revival of Keynesian monetary and fiscal policies. This interdisciplinary Action  critically assesses sources, dynamics and consequences of the global financial crisis. It aims to develop a completely new approach to financial stability, reach a better understanding of financial crises in general, and formulate specific policy goals to make financial markets more secure.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS0902    

 The main objective of the Action  is to increase empirical, theoretical and policy relevant knowledge about the changing role of medical professionals in the management of healthcare. This Action  is rooted in a number of recent trends in healthcare: the growing involvement of doctors in management and changes in medical education, training and career structures. These changes are assumed to be positive, leading to improvements in organization learning and control, innovation and user voice. However the evidence supporting such conclusions remains fragmented. While changes in the relationship between management and medicine have received some attention at national levels, there is less research adopting a rigorous, comparative, interdisciplinary perspective. Focusing on hospital doctors the Action  aims to address these limitations to advance theoretical, empirical and policy relevant knowledge. The wider benefit for society will be the identification of promising practices in healthcare management to facilitate policy change at both national and European levels. The Action  will also contribute to goals of enhancing the mobility of clinical professionals and the user voice in healthcare.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS0903    

 This Action  aims to produce a broader understanding of the worldwide spread of European architecture across empires during the 19th and 20th c. by focusing on its vectors, connections, semantics and materiality in a large range of geographic and linguistic contexts engaging both Western and non-Western environments. It posits that the bilateral colonial channel (e.g. French architecture in Algeria or British architecture in India), represented but one aspect of a larger multifaceted history. By combining architectural history with area studies  knowledge, the intention is to map and analyze more complex dissemination patterns and border-crossing relationships. Beyond architecture, the challenge is to contribute to the writing of a global history of modern European culture, including overseas expansions and transnational dynamics in its scope. To that end, this Action  proposes joining efforts at the European level in collaboration with non-European researchers.  A major outcome will be the development of accurate digital resources on the topic, as a first step towards the building of a research infrastructure.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS0904    

 The main objectives of this Action  are to develop an enhanced capacity for scholarly analysis of the emergence of Southern Multinationals to establish and test empirically their impact on Europe and its stakeholders; to assess existing EU wide and country policies in relation to this phenomenon and make policy recommendations. Traditionally Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) has flowed from advanced developed economies into developed and developing countries. More recently a new trend has emerged in the pattern of FDI. Outward bound FDI from emerging economies has begun to increase significantly and has been growing at a faster pace than FDI from the advanced developed world. The Action  seeks to develop and sustain an international research network to study the impact of this new phenomenon for Europe and its stakeholders. The goal of the network is to implement a research agenda that will be of value to all stakeholders and policy makers in Europe as they grapple with this facet of globalisation.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS0905    

 The main objective of this Action  is to advance state-of-the-art knowledge of the key transformations of European audiences within a changing media and communication environment, identifying their interrelationships with the social, cultural and political areas of European societies. The Action  will coordinate research efforts into the key transformations of European audiences within a changing media and communication environment, identifying their complex interrelationships with the social, cultural and political areas of European societies. The Action  will offer a perspective which is different from that of conventional ICT -focused audience research, by (a) bringing together experts who study a wide range of media, old  mass media included, to understand how these relate to each other and to everyday life, and (b) paying equal attention to audience-focused issues (especially media interpretations and mediated experiences) and user-focused issues (both adoption and use of technologies). The Action  will be of benefit to the scientific and education communities, to media, communication and ICT  industries and professionals, to policy-makers and regulatory bodies, and to media-oriented NGOs and citizen initiatives.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS0906    

 The main objective of the Action  is to advance scientific knowledge about ways of improving maternity care provision and outcomes for mothers, babies and families across Europe by understanding what works, for who, in what circumstances , and by identifying and learning from the best. Around 4.7 million European women experience childbirth annually. Optimal maternal and infant health is critical to societal well-being. Survival rates have improved, but there are now concerns about iatrogenic morbidity. There are significant cross-EU differences in maternity care cultures, philosophies, organisation, uptake, and outcomes. This Action  will advance scientific knowledge about ways of improving maternity care provision and outcomes by examining what works, for who, in what circumstances, and by identifying and learning from the best. The work will include an examination of first trimester prenatal diagnosis, routine intrapartum interventions for low risk women, and care for migrant women. Bringing all maternity care in Europe up to the standard of the best is the ultimate aim of the Action .       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS0907    

 Europe seeks to become the most dynamic knowledge-based economy of the globe, and the production and circulation of bio-objects , such as stem cells, chimera, tissue samples or genetically modified organisms, play a key part in this endeavour. This Action  develops novel interdisciplinary tools based on a range of evidence that will improve our understanding of bio-objects , their production and governance. The core questions answered through this Action  are: how are the boundaries between human and animal, organic and non-organic, living and the non-living opened up?; how do bio-objects change social relations?; how does the public-private interface shape the making of bio-objects?; and finally, how does the governance of bio-objects perform at different levels, from the level of the European Union and its Member States to the sub-political level, and finally in clinics and laboratories?       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1001    

 Occupational diseases (ODs) impose a heavy burden on both workers and employers and represent enormous economic costs. In general, the information on incidence and prevalence of occupational diseases is rather poor and inconsistent between countries, and there is an urgent need for new methods and instruments to trace new and emerging occupational health (OH) risks. This Action s objective is to develop a network for exchange of knowledge on, and setting the basis for comparative evaluation and development of new techniques to enhance the information on trends in ODs, on discovering and validating new OH risks more quickly (data mining, workers  and physicians  reporting coupled with novel statistical techniques) and use of modern techniques to discuss and disseminate information (platforms, social media).       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1002    

 International law faces several structural changes: from the advent of asymmetric wars, the war on terror, the resurrection of targeted killings, piracy to the degradation of the global environment or the challenges posed by the global economic crisis. These challenges escape the constitutive confines of the state system and require new answers. The current literature treats fragmentation, politicization and constitutionalisation as separate or opposite trends in the international legal order. This Action  takes as a vantage point that they have to be thought together as dimensions of a more fundamental systemic change. This Action  therefore brings together scholars from a variety of disciplines to analyze this complex relationship and assess the changing structure of the legal system.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1003    

 Web-based data collection (surveys, experimenting, testing, non-reactive data collection, and mobile Internet research) is/will become important for all social science fields. In avoiding both a simultaneous waste of effort and the use of web data without scientific validity, a multidisciplinary network is proposed to address web-based data collection, its methodologies, scientific validity, and use in the social sciences. WEBDATANET will benefit from communication throughout the social sciences by establishing a network bringing together social scientists, survey and web-based data collection experts, and data users. It will tackle several web-based data collection problems and discuss scientific validity by using different data sources, such as existing web-surveys, social networks, and other web 2.0 technologies. WEBDATANET will generate innovative ideas, address the latest technological options, synergise knowledge, foster the drafting of cross-national research proposals, and provide new tools and guidance for researchers, official bodies, and statistical institutes. WEBDATANET will promote web-based data usage in the EU by supplying web-based teaching and discussion platforms, disseminating findings, and organizing conferences, working groups, and research exchanges. It will contribute to the theoretical foundation of web-based data collection, stimulate its integration into the entire research process (e-science), and enhance its credibility in the name of public interest.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1004    

 Medieval Cultures  Technological Resources (Medioevo Europeo) groups experts from all over Europe to create a Virtual Centre for Medieval Studies: a virtual, team work space in which to collaborate, communicate and share work and research tools. Medioevo Europeo fits into the COST framework as it coordinates existing research on the use of ICT  for Medieval Studies, a field where ICT  has potential to improve and substantiate research, and specifically on interoperability between databases used for storage and research in this area. Through 4 years of cooperation, Medioevo Europeo links modern technology to medieval studies and combines technological development with intensive training of researchers. The European framework offers the means to connect the wealth of scientific material available, while ensuring interoperability, data security, and suitability for differing academic contexts. The Action  includes 4 interrelated Working Groups, relating to Authors and texts; Manuscripts and textual tradition; Textual Corpora and Reading Tools, VCMS design. Medioevo Europeo promotes social, technological and scientific advances. It promotes an understanding of Europe as a union of diverse but complimentary heritages. It develops a key scientific resource and defines improved technical standards for academic databases. It promotes researcher employability through extensive skill enhancement.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1005    

 Language policies for signing deaf Europeans require reliable reference grammars of their sign languages (SLs), which are generally lacking or of limited validity if they exist. They constitute the basis for teaching and training purposes. In addition, descriptive grammars are essential for the documentation of a European linguistic and cultural heritage which is largely unrecognized to date. Making SL grammars available to signing communities, policy makers, linguists and to civil society in general will strengthen the status of SLs and support full participation of their users in society. In parallel, deepening the knowledge on SL grammars with a theoretically informed comparative approach will contribute to the characterization of the human faculty of language, whose study is severely biased towards spoken languages. In this way, empirical and theoretical results from SLs will have an impact on several domains of the current agenda of Cognitive Sciences. This Action  aims to develop the first European network to design a blueprint for those reference grammars, which are indispensable tools.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1006    

  Due to its broad definition and understanding culture  can be regarded as a fundamental issue, even a precondition to be met on the path towards Sustainable Development (SD) that is necessary to get to grips with in our various European societies. Yet the theoretical and conceptual understanding of culture within the general frames of sustainability remains vague. Consequently, the role of culture in the political framework of sustainable development is poorly operationalised. Therefore, the ultimate goal of this proposed COST- Action  is to increase understanding of and determine the role of culture in SD based on multidisciplinary principles. The work will be carried out 1) by investigating and operationalizing the concept of culture in the context of SD through multidisciplinary approaches and analyses; 2) by examining the best practices for bringing culture into policy and practical domains, and 3) by developing means and indicators for assessing the impacts of culture on SD. The results of the Actions  will be exploited by the scientific community, policy makers, administrative personnel and practitioners working with sustainability and culture from the EU to the local level.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1007    

 This Action  aims to enhance and improve understanding of one of the most disputed and politically-charged consequences of climate change: migration. To do so, it brings together a diverse ensemble of established and early-stage social scientists to build upon and extend existing social science research into climate change and migration across three interrelated fields of investigation: knowledge; law and policy; and theory. The Action  has five objectives: to enhance and improve understanding of climate change and migration; to furnish state and non-state actors with state-of-the-art empirical, theoretical, legal and policy research on climate change and migration; to inform national and international policy dialogue, such as the IPCC and other policy initiatives; to expand research capacity in the area of climate change and migration; and to establish a network of Europe-based social science researchers working on climate change and migration. The beneficiaries of the Action  include states, in particular those of the European Union, as well as environmental, development and humanitarian NGOs, and IGOs, such as UNFCCC, IPCC, UNEP, UNDP, IOM and ILO.  Moreover, by facilitating the development of world-leading social science perspectives on climate change and migration, the Action  aims to enhance development and build adaptive capacity amongst those most vulnerable climate change.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1101    

 In the last 20 years social services have experienced significant restructuring throughout Europe, involving cuts in public funding, devolution (from central to local governments), externalisation (from public to private providers). Among the reasons for such changes have been stressed the fiscal crisis of the State (on the supply side) and the need to ensure greater efficiency, wider consumer choice and more democratic governance (on the demand side). Although relevant research is available on such processes, the recent global financial crisis and the awareness that, among services of general interest, social services are a major vehicle of social and territorial cohesion, have brought social services back on the EU agenda. This Action  seeks to involve institutions that are already carrying out research on these themes, in different nations, from different disciplinary points of view, and with different emphases, to jointly assess the effects of the restructuring processes, from five points of view: efficiency (cost/quality); democratic governance; social and territorial cohesion; labour; gender. The COST frame will allow existing knowledge to be shared and valorised within a structured comparative framework, with a view to i) disseminate findings at the local and international scale; ii) identify inputs for a European social policy platform.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1102    

 European societies are becoming ethnically and culturally more diverse, yet their health systems are failing to keep pace. This Action  aims to promote the adoption and implementation of policies responding to this increased diversity. It builds on the achievements of COST Action  IS0603 (Health and Social Care for Migrants and Ethnic Minorities  HOME), which reviewed health inequalities among migrants and ethnic minorities as well as the measures designed to remedy them. ADAPT will take this work forward, identifying obstacles to translating this knowledge into action as well as levers for change . Despite a remarkable increase in research and innovation in this area, as well as significant backing from international bodies, the pace of change in Europe remains slow. Few countries have adopted national policies on migrant and ethnic minority health and even where they have, implementation has encountered many obstacles. This Action  will make practical recommendations for promoting change. Interdisciplinary teams will identify bottlenecks and missed opportunities, while the pan-European nature of COST will provide a unique opportunity to identify the factors driving policy and implementation. The results will have implications for effective policy making and organisational change, not only in health but alsoin other fields of public policy.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1103    

 The uneven geographical distribution of economic activities is a huge worldwide challenge. For the EU regions this is shown by the deep differences within and across nations. Spatial inequalities are evolving through time following complex patterns determined by economic, geographical, institutional and social factors. The New Economic Geography approach, which was initiated by P. Krugman in the early 1990 s, describes economic systems as very simplified spatial structures. The Action  aims at developing a more sophisticated modelling of the EU visualised as an evolving trade network with a specific topology determined by the number and strength of national, regional and local links. Economic policies should be specifically designed to take into account this pervasive network structure assessing the position of backward locations within the network and focussing on instruments that favour interconnections. The expected results will provide a basis for an improved evaluation of such policies, in particular for the European Cohesion policy, considering their impact on the welfare level of EU citizens and its geographical distribution. To achieve this objective this Action  will enhance interdisciplinary networking combining recent approaches in economics with the most advanced mathematical and computational methods for analysing complex and non-linear systems.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1104    

 Maritime safety and security have become matter of  concern for many States and for the international community as a whole. However, the existing international legal framework does not yet recognize maritime safety and security as specific and autonomous legal regimes, and the practice also mirrors the weakness and the fragmentation existing in the field. This Cost Action  will take an in-depth look at current urgent maritime matters focusing on four main issues: i.e., shipping and marine environmental protection, new developments of economic activities at sea, maritime international security and border surveillance and, finally, protection of fragile and semi-enclosed seas. The Action  aims to bring together experts in international law of the sea in order to increase the knowledge on these topics and to develop a common conceptual and methodological framework with the goal of contributing to filling the above-mentioned gaps and of transforming scientific results into feasible solutions for ensuring safety and security at sea. The Action  is intended to foster the identification and exploitation of synergies between EU policies on maritime safety and security. From this point of view, the Action  is complementary to the existing European cross-sectorial initiatives in this area, and finds added value from its implementation within the COST framework and through its allowing the existing knowledge to be shared and enhanced within a structured comparative framework, with a view to a) disseminating findings at national and international level; b) identifying inputs for supporting the decision-making process in the field.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1105    

 Offender supervision in Europe has developed rapidly in scale, distribution and intensity in recent years. However, the emergence of mass supervision  (i.e. in the community) has largely escaped the attention of legal scholars and social scientists more concerned with the mass incarceration  reflected in prison growth. As well as representing an important analytical lacuna for penology in general and comparative criminal justice in particular, the neglect of supervision means that research has not delivered the knowledge that is urgently required to engage with political, policy and practice communities grappling with delivering justice efficiently and effectively in fiscally straitened times, and with the challenges of communicating the meaning, legitimacy and utility of supervision to an insecure public. This Action  aims to remedy these problems by facilitating cooperation between institutions and individuals in different European states (and with different disciplinary perspectives) who are already carrying out research on offender supervision or, in the case of early stage researchers, are attracted to that field. It will review and synthesise existing knowledge and then enrich it through interdisciplinary and comparative work and capacity building. The Action  will thus provide a European forum on offender supervision for academics, policy makers, practitioners and interested citizens.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1106    

 The upheavals in North Africa and the Middle East in early 2011 caught most analysts and decision makers by surprise. In order to better prepare researchers and policy makers for future conflicts, this Action  will build a new network called the European Network of Conflict Research  (ENCoRe). Bringing together scholars in at least 10 COST countries, the network is supported by innovative tools for data integration and analysis. The aim of the Action  is to coordinate and accelerate the construction and maintenance of conflict datasets with the help of an integrated online portal that allows researchers and policy makers to analyse and predict the outbreak and course of conflict processes around the world. Focusing on civil war and related types of political violence such as violent protest, riots, state repression and terrorism, our goal is to overcome institutional fragmentation currently hindering progress in European conflict research and to complement country-based analyses of countries with integrated data that enable scholars to study a wide range of risk factors. To achieve these objectives, the Action  will launch a series of activities organized around the database system, as well as workshops with scientists and policy makers and training sessions for younger researchers.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1107    

 Disasters overwhelm local and often national capacity to respond effectively. Significant imbalances result between needs and available resources. Disasters have become more frequent and more costly, trends predicted to continue. As a result, disaster risk reduction and management are important priorities for national, European and global agencies. Ethical decisions must be made throughout disaster planning and in responses. High levels statements stress the importance of disaster ethics to put people first in disasters. Yet few resources are available for disaster ethics decision-making. Policy makers, humanitarian agencies and individual responders seek ethical guidance and training materials to better address the challenging and distressful ethical dilemmas in disasters. Evidence-based knowledge is required to promote high-quality ethical decision-making. This Action  aims to improve ethical decision-making for disasters by gathering knowledge of the ethical dilemmas and issues, carefully examining them, and developing training materials and published resources to address disaster ethics. These outputs will assist policy-makers, humanitarian organisations, healthcare professionals, researchers and the public. The Action  will benefit European citizens, organisations and States who already provide extensive resources for disaster relief. Thereby, the Action  will benefit those affected by disasters which disproportionately impact lower income countries and the more vulnerable within those regions.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1201    

 ICTs have had a major impact on the content and location of work. Digitisation of information has transformed labour processes whilst telecommunications have enabled jobs to be relocated globally. But ICTs have also enabled the creation of entirely new types of 'digital' or 'virtual' labour, both paid and unpaid,  shifting the borderline between 'play' and 'work' and creating new types of unpaid labour connected with consumption and co-creation of services. This affects private life as well as transforming the nature of work. Because of the gender division of labour, this affects women and men differently. The changing geography of virtual work and the emergence of new value-generating virtual activities have major implications for economic development, skills and innovation policies. However these are poorly understood because they have been studied in a highly fragmentary way by isolated researchers. This Action  will distil knowledge to enable policymakers to separate facts from hype and develop effective strategies to generate new employment and economic development in Europe. It will bring together experts in the fields of communications, innovation, management, digital media, creative industries, technology, employment, economics, sociology, geography, gender studies and cultural studies to consolidate theory, map this emerging field, support early stage researchers and develop new research agendas.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1202    

 This Action  aims to go beyond the nationally oriented memory studies that tend to reify the bond between culture, nation and memory. Instead we investigate the transcultural dynamics of memory in Europe today. Studying how memories of the troubled twentieth century are transmitted and received across Europe, the Action  explores the tension between attempts to create a common European memory, or a unitary memory ethics, on the one hand and numerous memory conflicts stemming from Europe s fragmentation into countless memory communities on the other. Drawing on recent theoretical insights that point to the importance of memory migration, mediation and new media the Action  seeks to develop new methods for studying and comparing effects of memory transmission over cultural borders. The Action  aims to develop European memory studies theoretically and methodologically by focusing on transculturality, agency and reception - and to contribute to finding ways of accommodating memory conflicts.        Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1203    

 This project is based on bringing together principles of ecosystem services (ES), which focus on life support systems, with more non-material services such as culture, health and wellbeing through tourism. It aims to link research on wellbeing provided by ecosystems and their use via tourism, leisure and recreation activities. The underpinning issue of this proposal is to produce new and collaborative research on how and in what way can tourism be a catalyst for improving human health and wellbeing, by using in a symbiotic and sustainable way natural resources and services provided by ecosystems, as well as exploring the challenges of (e)valuation of such services. This will be achieved by creating a collaborative European network of research centres based around four key working groups, namely (a) theoretical relationships between tourism, wellbeing and ES ; (b) empirical and methodological research challenges and approaches; (c) interrelations between ageing, wellbeing and ES; and (d) policy frameworks  analysis and research-informed policy making.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1204    

 Social representations of history are vital to form a group s identity. They have a wide social and political impact as they provide some of the cultural contents that accompany identity changes following societal transformations. In Europe, these representations are fragmented between nations or ethnic groups. They elicit group-based emotions that influence behaviours and may lead to intergroup conflicts or reconciliation The aim of the COST Action  is to advance knowledge on the role played by social representations of history in processes of ethnic, national, and European identities construction and intergroup conflicts. It will coordinate research on 1) the psychological antecedents of lay representations of history; 2) their content and structure; 3) their transmission through history textbooks and other media; and 4) their social psychological effects in shaping attitudes. The Action  will stimulate scientific cooperation among social psychologists and historians sharing an interest for history education from a wide range of countries. This will be done through four Working groups, two international conferences, Short-Term Scientific Missions, a summer school and a dedicated website. The Action  will have an impact in both scientific and public domains through academic and public dissemination.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1205    

 Femicide is a leading cause of premature death for women globally, distinct from homicide and other forms of gender violence. Femicide research is abundant in the United States. In Europe, agencies have funded initiatives on gender and violence but not specifically on femicide. Research is in its infancy and uncoordinated. It requires an interdisciplinary approach, focusing on victim and perpetrator, upon cultural (e.g. honour killings ) and psychological causes, and on societal issues. The Action  will establish the first pan-European coalition on femicide with researchers who are already studying the phenomenon nationally, in order to advance research clarity, agree on definitions, improve theefficacy of policies for femicide prevention, and publish guidelines for the use of national policy-makers. Different forms of publications will emerge from the Action , such as articles, books, newsletters and an Action  internet site for the use of researchers, practitioners and policy-makers. Workshops will be held annually, adding advocates and researchers each year, and an Action  Conference will be held to attract stakeholders until the Action  will organise a pan-European conference to launch the idea of a European Observatory on femicide.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1206    

 In the current comparative research concerning public sector modernization, the local level of government is blatantly absent. Databases on local public sector reforms are fragmented, incomparable, incoherent, nationally scattered and confined in their methodological approach. This Action  is intended to remedy those deficits. It will generate coherent data bases for systematic comparison with a view to streamlining analytical approaches and synthesizing research outcomes using methodological triangulation (qualitative/quantitative techniques). The Action  will provide a platform for establishing a new set of comparative (descriptive, explanatory, and evaluative) knowledge on local public sector reforms and for integrating the fragmented research activities in this neglected area of investigation. It aims to enhance the scope of the conceptual foundations as well as the methodological rigour of comparative public administration. The Action  will prepare the basis for a systematic evaluation of local public sector reforms within a European scale of comparison. Action  activities will yield policy relevant knowledge concerning local reform measures from a European perspective, which can then be utilized to improve policy making for future public sector modernization.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1207    

 Aphasia, a language problem due to stroke, affects the understanding and expression of spoken and written language. Communication with families, friends and the wider community may be severely affected. Altered social interaction isolates the person with aphasia and impacts on their emotional wellbeing. Aphasia contributes to poorer functional recovery, mobility, discharge destination and return to employment. With an aging population and improved stroke survival, the societal and economic burden of aphasia will rise. Effective management and rehabilitation of aphasia is vital. Aphasia research faces methodological and infrastructural challenges. Typically it remains language, region and discipline specific limiting the efficiency, strength and broader relevance of any research. This Action  aims to establish a network of leading European multidisciplinary aphasia investigators in rehabilitation, social science, linguistics and language research. This collaborative network will enhance knowledge, skills and methodology relating to aphasia research. Consensus activities will facilitate international synergy between members in aphasia assessment  diagnosis. Data sharing activities will support enhanced prognosis and rehabilitation of aphasia. In addition, this Action  will foster and coordinate the development of high quality aphasia research activity which will address the needs of people with aphasia and their families, health and social care providers and voluntary groups.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1208    

 ProsPol will compare and disseminate knowledge about the multiple contexts, features and effects of prostitution policies at the European, national and local levels. Due to the combined pressures of globalisation and changing patterns of migration, trafficking and the commercialisation of sex, prostitution has received unprecedented levels of attention in the last three decades. This has led to a heightened demand for effective models of regulation, for legal harmonization and sharing practice across jurisdictions. Nevertheless, much is contested in this field, with countries adopting varying approaches in light of their own particular political, social and legal cultures. At present there are no efficient strategies to address these complex issues and their comprehensive analysis remain fragmented, with little communication amongst researchers from different countries and between researchers and policy makers. This Action  will fulfil the pressing need to exchange knowledge and develop comparative approaches on prostitution policies, their effects and the complex contexts influencing them. It will provide an innovative platform of exchange to enhance understanding of how concepts, policies and practices transfer across national cultures and local contexts, and the implications this has for knowledge exchange and coordination in the field.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1209    

 Until recently, societal interest in looks  has been considered largely benign, however, debilitating levels of appearance dissatisfaction are now normative in resource-rich nations, with extensive and damaging impacts on physical and psychological health.  Although there are examples of research and activism in the field in Europe, many researchers work in isolation, diluting the potential impact of their work.  Europe currently lacks a harmonised approach to establishing levels of appearance-related distress, the impacts on key areas of living and to the systematic evaluation of interventions currently being implemented within and beyond Europe. This Action  will co-ordinate and increase research across Europe, offer support to the high proportion of female and early career researchers in this field and will forge crucial links between researchers, practitioners and policy makers, offering the potential for significant benefits to the millions of Europeans adversely affected by these issues.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1210    

 This Action  aims to coordinate research activities being currently developed at several European universities and research institutes and create a (virtual) centre of expertise for the study of religious culture in late medieval and early modern Europe, a period traditionally depicted as one of great cultural discontinuity and binary oppositions between learned (Latin) and unlearned (vernacular) and ecclesiastical hierarchy and the lay believers. Challenging stereotypical descriptions of exclusion of lay and non-Latinate people from religious and cultural life the project, this Action  will concentrate on the reconstruction of the process of emancipation of the laity and the creation of new "communities of interpretations". The Action  will therefore analyze patterns of social inclusion and exclusion and examine shifts in hierarchic relations amongst groups, individuals and their languages, casting new yet profoundly historical light on themes of seminal relevance to present-days societies.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1301    

 Forensic psychiatric care is aimed at improving mental health and reducing the risk of recidivism of mentally disordered offenders. For some mentally disordered offenders (life-)long forensic psychiatric care is required. Due to different legal frameworks, policies and resources in COST countries, treatment programs and care provided for these offenders vary substantially within Europe. The proposed Action  aims at establishing a European network of researchers, clinicians and service providers about long-term forensic psychiatric care. The network is open for practitioners and experts from different disciplines and from different career stages. Researchers and clinicians will join their expertise and research activities to set the basis for comparative evaluation and research on effective treatment and the development of "best practice" in long-term forensic psychiatry in Europe. This will lead to the development of cost effective policies in forensic services, evidence-based practice in long-term forensic care and improvement of patients' quality of life.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1302    

 The falling cost of genome sequencing is making genetic information more easily accessible to the ordinary citizen. The proliferation of different actors in COST countries and beyond, engaging with the generation and interpretation of genetic data represents a tremendous opportunity but also a new challenge for society. The public health care system will increasingly be asked to provide interpretation and counselling relating to genetic information that has been generated privately and to satisfy the legitimate curiosity of participants in large-scale population genetic research. Existing ethical and regulatory frameworks may not be suitable to allow an efficient and ethical meeting of demand and supply of genetic knowledge and health, as well as a virtuous interaction between public and private actors. This Action  aims to improve the state of the art by creating a community of researchers and stakeholders and linking existing initiatives which bring critical expertise in bioethics, social studies of science and technology, genetic technology, information and communication technology ( ICT ), stakeholder deliberation, and patient centred initiatives (PCI).       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1303    

 Most governments and the new European Union Chief Scientist support the concept of evidence-based decision-making in policy. However, there is a substantial gap between the science models relevant for cutting-edge research and those required for policy analysis. Science-based models often involve substantial uncertainty which require defensible and timely characterisation. The shortage and cost of timely empirical data inevitably requires scientific expert judgment. How this is best elicited is critical to a decision process, as differences in the robustness of elicitation methods can be substantial. Good examples, pioneered in Europe, do exist in specific areas of science, but generalizing and spreading this good practice into other disciplines is hard. Performed rigorously, expert elicitation and mapping of stakeholders  views are powerful means for obtaining rational and scientifically founded assessments of uncertainty. This Action  will utilize the COST framework to stimulate the emergence and spread of high quality evidence-based decision support methods to ensure that scientists can have a stronger influence on policy questions by interacting with policy makers and Chief Scientist offices. By including training for young scientists the Action  helps create a new generation of scientists who are confident and able to bridge the gaps between science and policy.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1304    

 Computers and the availability of the World Wide Web have significantly changed the conditions for the production and reception of dictionaries. For editors of scholarly dictionaries the Internet is not only a source of inspiration, it also generates new and serious challenges: (a) To give users easier access to scholarly dictionaries and to bridge the gap between the general public and scholarly dictionaries, (b) To establish both a broader and more systematic exchange of expertise and common standards and solutions, (c) To develop a common approach to e-lexicography that forms the basis for a new type of lexicography that fully embraces the pan-European nature of much of the vocabularies of the languages spoken in Europe. The proposed Action  aims to establish a European network of lexicographers in order to deal with the above issues in a structured way.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1305    

 Globalization, increased mobility and transnational networking transform the linguistic ecologies of contemporary societies. In this Action  the aim is to bring multilinguals into the focus of these processes by investigating the challenges and opportunities involved in acquiring, using and being understood as a new speaker  of a language in the context of a multilingual Europe. New speakers, from this perspective, are all multilingual citizens who, by engaging with languages other than their native  or national  language(s), need to cross existing social boundaries, re-evaluate their own levels of linguistic competence and creatively (re)structure their social practices to adapt to new and overlapping linguistic spaces. The network facilitates structured dialogue and collaboration amongst researchers from three different multilingual strands: regional minorities, immigrants and transnational workers. Through the network, the Action  will foreground common threads across the different strands, compare new speaker  profiles across multilingual contexts and develop a holistic understanding of this new sociolinguistic paradigm that can help to rethink how languages are managed at all levels including education, healthcare, workplace, family, community, the media, cyberspace and public institutions.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1306    

 Scholars presently exploring how matter comes to matter  call themselves new or neo-materialists. They do radically interdisciplinary research based on the conviction that the current economic, ecological and political crises as well as technological advances and everyday practices do not allow a conception of matter  as (an) object(s) that could be captured along traditional disciplinary lines. Stock market crashes, earthquakes and the increasing complexification of political and social systems (and their breakdowns) demonstrate active interventions of materials previously regarded mute or socially constructed. Meaning-making ( to matter ) does not occur only in the linguistic frameworks academic research applies to phenomena and crises in a retrograde move. The current European new materialist scene is vibrant but remains largely dispersed compared to the U.S.A., which dominates discussions at the moment. This Action  wants to network European new materialisms: how do they look, and what can they innovate?       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1307    

 This Action  brings together researchers to investigate populist political communication and its impact on democratic political life across Europe. This is necessary not only in light of recent populist backlashes in many democracies against governments and political and economic developments, but also in respect to changes in national media and communication systems. In order to comprehend this poorly understood aspect of contemporary political communication this Action  will examine three interconnected but distinct aspects of populist political communication: First, populist political communicators and their strategies. Second, the media and populist discourses and frames. Third, citizen s engagement with populist political messages and the effect of these messages. This Action  will provide a thorough critical review of existing knowledge, much improved research co-ordination, widen co-operation between scholars, bridge gaps in existing knowledge and strengthen dialogue with various societal stakeholders, benefiting media organizations, NGOs and policy actors as well as the wider scientific community.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1308    

 Set against scientific predictions, the current governance responses to climate change are widely perceived to be inadequate. There is a growing perception that climate governance is becoming more polycentric, but far less agreement on how it will be coordinated and where the necessary leadership will originate.  This is deeply problematic, because in theory innovative and cost effective policies should prevent losses arising from climate change and better capture any benefits. To address this gap, this Action  will help build the capacity for innovating in climate governance by: identifying effective ways of stimulating and diffusing policy and governance innovations; building a stronger evaluation capacity to assess such innovations; and spreading usable knowledge in innovative ways such as via open access course materials. To do all this, it will create a new network of scholars and practitioners that have operated in a fragmented way thus far, specifically those that have focused on the sources  of policy innovation, those that know about their diffusion ( patterns ), and those who are able to evaluate their ultimate effects . A COST Action  is the perfect vehicle to defragment knowledge of these topics by extracting greater value from and better integrating across previous research investments.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1309    

 The early modern communications revolution allowed scholars to scatter correspondence across Europe, knitting together the international, knowledge-based civil society crucial to that era s intellectual breakthroughs and formative for many of modern Europe s values and institutions. The current IT revolution provides means for reassembling and disseminating this precious literary heritage for the first time while fostering new forms of scholarly cooperation. In pursuit of these aims, this Action  will (1) undertake a historiographical reconsideration of the place of the Republic of Letters in Europe s cultural formation; (2) coordinate the intensive discussion amongst librarians and archivists, IT experts, and scholars needed to plan a state-of-the-art digital system within which to collect a pan-European pool of highly granular data on the Republic of Letters; (3) design tools for navigating, analysing and visualising this huge pool of data, and for facilitating new forms of international and interdisciplinary scholarly collaboration, thereby consolidating a new virtual Republic of Letters; and (4) experiment with using this system to engage the broader public with the cutting-edge technical and scholarly work on this key phase of European cultural and intellectual integration.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1310    

 Capabilities are not only abilities that reside inside humans, but they also comprise the political, social, and economic environment. Literacy is a capability whose fulcrum is far away from the individual, depending crucially on societal forces that can hinder or promote human development. The efficiency of this promotion is critically constrained by the availability of accurate knowledge. Knowing about literacy is contingent upon an interdisciplinary web of expertise that can, within a reasonable timeline, produce that sort of knowledge. Such networks already exist in Europe, but needs to be sustained so that it can face the demands of the new digital era. Through this Action , reading and writing research communities across Europe are joining, integrating their findings, and aligning their agendas so that they can: 1) develop an integrated and inclusive approach to foundational literacy across Europe; 2) devise a comprehensive framework of developmental aspects of literacy and education in a digital world; and 3) further improve literacy technologies. This will be valuable for promoting citizens  interdependence, participation, and innovation, which are key assets to a united and diverse Europe. For that, Europe needs a Literacy Network via which capabilities can be strengthened to all of its citizens.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1401    

 Ageism (i.e., the complex and often negative social construction of old age) is highly prevalent. There is unequivocal evidence concerning the negative consequences associated with ageism at the individual, familial, and societal levels. The long term goal of this Action  is to challenge the practice of ageism and allow older people to realize their full potential. This will be achieved by enhancing scientific knowledge and attention to ageism, by bringing together and integrating the different disciplines of research, by developing national, multi-national and international collaborations with public policy officials, non-academic professionals, civil society NGOs and older persons, and by fostering a new generation of researchers. Expected deliverables include: a) the creation of a web-site; b) a depository database of scientific measures and evidence based interventions that target ageism; c) the facilitation of scientific Training Schools, Short Term Scientific Missions and conferences; and d) the dissemination of collaborative working papers, scientific reports, proceedings, academic publications, policy and recommendation papers and an edited book on ageism. In light of the changing demographics, the high prevalence of ageism, its complex social roots, broad consequences, and the limited research on the topic, this Action  is timely and has both practical and scientific significance.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1402    

 The Action , Oceans Past Platform (OPP), aims to measure and understand the significance and value to European societies of living marine resource extraction and production to help shape the future of coasts and oceans. The Integrative Platform will lower the barriers between human, social and natural sciences; multiply the learning capacity of research environments; and enable knowledge transfer and co-production among researchers and other societal actors, specifically by integrating historical findings of scale and intensity of resource use into management and policy frameworks. The oceans offer rich resources for feeding a hungry world. However, the sea is an alien space in a sense that the land is not. Fishing requires skills that must be learnt, it presupposes culinary preferences, technical ability, knowledge of target species, and a backdrop of material and intangible culture. OPP asks when, how and with what socio-economic, political, cultural and ecological implications humans have impacted marine life, primarily in European seas in the last two millennia. The Action  calls on historians, archaeologists and social scientists as well as colleagues from the marine sciences to engage in dialogue and collaboration with ocean and coastal managers. OPP will develop historical descriptors and indicators for marine and coastal management.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1403    

 Developments in basic reading skills are a matter of urgent concern, and literacy is a key factor in the EU s growth strategy (Europe 2020). Research shows that the amount of time spent reading long-form texts is in decline, and due to digitization, reading is becoming more intermittent and fragmented. In international reading assessments (TIMSS/PIRLS [2006; 2011]; PISA [2009, 2012]), students from Asia, Canada and Oceania outperformed European students on several measures. In Europe, one in five lacks adequate reading skills. There is much speculation about the cognitive implications of digitization, and empirical evidence indicates that affordances of screen devices might negatively impact cognitive and emotional aspects of reading. The goal of this Action  is to improve scientific understanding of the implications of digitization, hence helping individuals, disciplines, societies and sectors across Europe to cope optimally with the effects. Based on a multidimensional, integrative model of reading, and combining paradigms from experimental sciences with perspectives (e.g., diachronic) from the humanities, the Action  will develop new research paradigms, and metrics for assessing the impact of digitization on reading. These metrics enable the development of evidence-based knowledge of paper and screen reading, and provide guidance for practitioners, policy makers, publishers and designers.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1404    

 Optimal maternal and infant health is critical to societal well-being. Reducing childbirth mortality and severe morbidity is a primary concern for most governments. However, this focus on pathology has been associated with an over-extension of clinical interventions to low risk women, with unexpected adverse clinical consequences, and rising health care costs. Part of the problem has been a scientific focus on understanding pathologies of pregnancy and childbirth from simple, clinical, linear perspectives, with a consequent lack of understanding of the range and limits of normal childbirth physiology in different populations, individuals, and contexts. The proposed Action  will advance scientific knowledge in this area from a whole-systems perspective, using the realist research framework of what works, for whom, in what circumstances. It will include five domains: 1. Biomedicine (epigenetics and the hygiene hypothesis); 2. Biomechanics (maternal and fetal movement); 3. Socio-cultural perspectives (social expectations and experiences, including marginalised and migrant populations); 4. Organizational perspectives (the effect of organizational contexts and cultures on variation in rates of childbirth interventions) 5. Neuro-psycho-social perspectives (how inter-personal actions and behaviours affect physiological processes).       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1405    

 Oral language (speaking and understanding) is critical to children's development, affecting the emergence of personal, social and academic skills throughout school and into the workplace. Most children acquire such skills effortlessly but a sizeable proportion, those with Language Impairment (LI), do not. LI affects 5.8 million children and young people (0-18 years) across Europe. There is evidence for the efficacy and effectiveness of intervention to improve the language skills of these children but this information is not well disseminated and services are inconsistent across Europe. This Action  will enhance the science in the field, improve the effectiveness of services for children with LI and develop a sustainable network of researchers well placed to answer the key questions in this area. The Action  will have 3 Working Groups comprising established/ early stage researchers and practitioners: 1. The linguistic and psychological underpinnings of interventions for LI; 2. The delivery of interventions for LI; 3. The social and cultural context of intervention for children with LI. This activity has never been attempted before despite there being services for these children in all European countries. The COST framework is the ideal mechanism for catalysing activity to promote research collaboration and produce to high quality outputs.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1406    

 There is written evidence of about twenty fragmentary ancient European languages. Of these some 20,000 documents are conserved on stone, metal or pottery in diverse systems of writing, some of which have not been completely deciphered yet. Research into them requires specialists in historical and philological-linguistic matters and these suffer from a pronounced geographical dispersion according to their geographical field of study (Gaul, Hispania Italy, the North of Africa) or to their corresponding linguistic family (Latin, Celtic, Italic, other minor Indo-European branches, Basque, ...). The main objective of the Action  is the co-ordination of researchers dedicated to the study of the different ancient languages and writings with the aim of creating an ample work team capable of establishing the foundations for the creation, for the first time, of a large online data bank which will permit the cataloguing of all the currently known documents in this type of languages, thus introducing this important part of the European cultural heritage into the 21st century.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1407    

 In Europe, earlier industrialization and poor environmental management practices have left a legacy of thousands of contaminated sites. Past and current industrial activities can cause local and diffuse contamination, to such an extent that it might threaten human health of resident populations, especially in vulnerable subgroup. Moreover, health, environment, and social aspects are strongly interconnected, local communities are often alarmed, and both scientists and policy makers have expressed concern. Distinct research initiatives on the health impact of contaminated sites have provided considerable evidence, however data are sparse, and assessments have seen a fragmentation of objectives and methods. It is therefore urgent to promote coordination and collaboration between researchers and risk managers to identify common strategies at European level to deal with this issue more systematically. This Action  aims at establishing and consolidating a European Network of experts and relevant institutions, and developing a common framework for research and response through conferences, workshops, training and dissemination activities. The Network will: clarify knowledge gaps and research priorities; support collection of relevant data and information; stimulate development of harmonised methodology; promote collaborative research initiatives, and develop guidance and resources on risk assessment, management and communication.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1408    

 The goal of this Action  is to advance scientific knowledge about the gendered impacts of extended working life on the health and economic well-being of older workers in Europe and to support informed gender-sensitive future policy, explicitly considering the differential needs of women and men. This requires exploring the differential impacts that such policy may have for the health and economic well-being of diverse groups of older workers, using a life course perspective which has been identified as an innovative approach to analysing policy impacts. While life course analysis of pensions has been employed in some COST countries, there is a need to build a research network to develop capacity in life course methods and in gender-aware policy analysis to enable accurate, timely, multi-disciplinary, cross-national analysis of employment policy and practice for older workers. Expected deliverables include: (a) creating a website; (b) depositary database of scientific measures and policy tool-kits; (c) facilitating training schools, Short Term Scientific Missions and conferences; (d) disseminating scientific reports, proceedings, academic publications, policy papers and an edited book on extended working life, health and gender. This Action  is both timely and policy-relevant, due to the pressing European phenomenon of demographic ageing, the piecemeal state of current research, and to develop appropriate and equitable policy in COST countries.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1409    

 The ability to negotiate digital forms of literacy carries high stakes for life destinations but in early childhood education, literacy still tends to be approached as predominantly print-based. The technologies through which children now engage with all forms of knowledge are constantly changing with the widespread use of an array of digital, interactive, converged and personalised devices. These are transforming the skills and literacies needed by even the youngest children to be competent actors in the world while, at the same time, challenging the efforts of parents and teachers to support their learning. The development of relevant skills and knowledge for reading and writing contemporary texts is crucial for educational, economic, social and cultural progress in Europe. The proposed Action  will create an interdisciplinary network to examine how young children s literacy development is being shaped by changes brought about by the digitisation of communication. The Action  will enable researchers across COST countries collectively to synthesise existing research and identify gaps in knowledge, thus avoiding duplication, fostering innovative avenues for future research and more effectively advancing knowledge in this area. The Action  will also build capacity by facilitating systematic exchange between established and early stage researchers across the network.       Individuals, Societies, Cultures and Health COST Action IS1410    

 Sonic Interaction Design is the exploitation of sound as one of the principal channels conveying information, meaning, and aesthetic/emotional qualities in interactive contexts. The Action  pro-actively contributes to the creation and consolidation of new design theories, tools, and practices in this innovative and interdisciplinary domain. While being advanced through a few sparse projects, this field relies on the COST SID Action  to strengthen the links between scientists, artists, and designers in the European Research Area. The COST  SID platform stands on four legs: (i) perception, cognition, and emotion; (ii) design; (iii) interactive art; (iv) information display and exploration. These are each supported by the research and development of the requisite new interactive technologies. Due to the breadth of its application spectrum, the COST SID Action  has the potential of affecting everyday life through physical and virtual interactive objects, as today there is the possibility to design and actively control their acoustic response so that it conveys an intended aesthetic, informational, or emotional content. Keywords : Interaction Design, Auditory Display and Sonfication, Sound and Music Computing, Sound Modelling, Sound Perception and Cognition.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC0601    

 The Action  aims to put together researchers coming from different fields such as Decision Theory, Discrete Mathematics, Theoretical Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence in order to improve decision support in presence of massive data bases, combinatorial structures, partial and/or uncertain information and distributed, possibly interoperating decision makers. Such problems arise in several real world decision problems such as humanitarian logistics, homeland security, epidemiology, risk assessment and management, e-government and the implementation of recommender systems. The Action  will coordinate ongoing research projects and provide a more solid framework to already existing networked activities. Keywords: Decision Theory, Artificial Intelligence, Algorithmic Efficiency, Uncertainty Management, Decision Support, Robustness.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC0602    

 Antennas are a key constituent of all terrestrial, airborne and space based wireless multimedia, communications and sensor systems. Antenna functions are fast evolving, driven by the demanding needs of the Information Society Technologies. Traditional antenna areas still demand research and innovation efforts. But also, new unforeseen and challenging problems are appearing. Antennas and electromagnetic sensors are also becoming a major system component in areas such as Consumer Electronics, Health Care, Biology, Radio Astronomy, Earth Sciences, and Earth Resources Monitoring. Cooperation towards a deeper understanding of antenna operation in these new complex environments and for the corresponding development of adequate modelling and measuring tools are the main scientific objectives of this Action . These trans-disciplinary oriented goals will benefit both antenna specialists and researchers working on the above mentioned domains. Additional benefits include university-industry collaborations, mobility of young researchers and support of Pan-European initiatives (European Conference and European School of Antennas). Keywords: Antenna theory, modelling software, measurements  characterisation. Antennas in systems: smart, reconfigurable, active  integrated, RF-MEMS, MIMOs, satellites. Antennas as sensors: body area networks, biomedical sensors, RFID tags, Earth observation  monitoring.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC0603    

 Coordination of research efforts to develop the most adequate technological framework for the management of multimedia electronic healthcare records (data and images) through the Internet. The Action  will consolidate the most renowned research references in the field of informatics applied to Anatomic Pathology in order to eventually develop, with support of national and other European programs, the fusion standards to represent, interpret, browse and retrieve digital medical images while preserving their diagnostic quality as needed for clinical, learning and research purposes. In a latter stage, this coordinated research shall bring about a comprehensive R D project which will deliver a much needed world wide search engine based on WebServices. This will definitively open the path to integration, search, access, exchange and upgrade of digital pathological images and associated reports among different hospital information systems regardless of their location. Based on common standards developed by European Normalization Committee (CEN), the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) and other bodies (DICOM, HL7, SNOMED), the direct result of this Action  shall be a new Pathology Technical Framework (IHE Pathology) to be taken as a new reference standard by the specialized E-health industry as well as the entire medical community. Keywords : Image Communication, Electronic health record, Pathology PACS, JPEG 2000 protocol, IHE initiative.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC0604    

 The main objective of the Action  is to develop verification technology with the reach and power to assure dependability of object-oriented programs on industrial scale. Software is vital for modern society. The efficient development of correct and reliable software is of ever growing importance. This Action  will concentrate on program verification: the construction of logical proofs that programs are correct. Logic-based technologies for the formal description, construction, analysis, and validation of software can be expected to complement and partly replace traditional software engineering methods in the future. Already, program verification methods have outgrown the area of academic case studies, and industry is showing serious interest. The logical next goal is the verification of industrial software products. Most programming languages used in industrial practice (such as Java, C++, and C#) are object-oriented. The Action  will therefore focus on the verification of programs written in object-oriented languages and the particular problems this entails. Keywords: program verification, formal methods in software engineering, program logics, formal specification, program correctness       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC0701    

 The main objective of the Action  is to strengthen the dialogue between the statistics and soft computing research communities in order to cross-pollinate both fields and generate mutual improvement activities. Soft computing, as an engineering science, and statistics, as a branch of mathematics, emphasize different aspects of data analysis. Soft computing focuses on obtaining working solutions quickly, accepting approximations and unconventional approaches. Its strength lies in its flexibility to create models that suit the needs arising in applications (context of discovery, model generation). In addition, it emphasizes the need for intuitive and interpretable models, which are tolerant to imprecision and uncertainty. Statistics is more rigorous and focuses on establishing objective conclusions based on experimental data by analysing the possible situations and their (relative) likelihood (context of justification, model validation). It emphasizes the need for mathematical methods and tools to assess solutions and guarantee performance. Bringing the two fields closer together will enhance the robustness and generalisability of data analysis methods, while preserving the flexibility to solve real-world problems efficiently and intuitively. Keywords: data analysis, soft computing, statistics, model generation, model validation       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC0702    

 The main objective of the Action  is to increase the quality and the impact of European research in the field of Traffic Monitoring and Analysis (TMA). Modern packet networks are highly complex and ever-evolving objects.  Understanding, developing and managing such environment is difficult and expensive in practice. Traffic Monitoring and Analysis (TMA) has always been seen as a key methodology to understand telecommunication technology and operation, and the complexity of the Internet has attracted many researchers to face traffic measurements since the pioneering times. The recent advances in the field of TMA suggest that evolved TMA-based techniques can play a key role in the operation of real networks. Today, the lack of insight and early recognition of emerging risks and/or performance issues can expose the network infrastructure to stability and security problems. TMA is therefore the basis for prevention and response in network security, as typically the detection of attacks and intrusions requires the analysis of detailed traffic records, e.g. packet traces. This Action  will coordinate both Research Groups and Network Operators active in the field of TMA, promoting the development of novel techniques and focusing the research efforts towards commonly recognized problems, thus driving the research towards real-world applications. It will foster the adoption of common monitoring tools and analysis platforms, so as to catalyze the emergence of a European de-facto standard for traffic monitoring, ultimately increasing the impact of European research in the field. Keywords: Internet, Traffic Monitoring, Traffic Analysis, Network Measurements, Security, Traffic Classification.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC0703    

 Agreement Technologies refer to computer systems in which autonomous software agents negotiate with one another, typically on behalf of humans, in order to come to mutually acceptable agreements. This Action  aims at coordinating national efforts on a new paradigm for next generation distributed systems, based on the concept of agreement between computational agents. An entity may choose whether to fulfill an agreement or not, and it should fulfill it when there is an obligation to do so derived from the standing agreements. Autonomy, interaction, mobility and openness are the characteristics that the paradigm will cover from a theoretical and practical perspective. Semantic alignment, negotiation, argumentation, virtual organisations, learning, real time, and several other technologies will be in the sandbox to define, specify and verify such systems. Both functional and non-functional properties are to be studied. Security on execution will be based on trust and reputation measures. These measures will help agents to determine with whom to interact and what terms and conditions to accept. Keywords: Agreement, Multiagent Systems, Semantics       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC0801    

 Telecommunication, Navigation and Earth Observation systems and services are developing world-wide with a multiplicity of standalone terrestrial and space systems that operate in diverse frequency bands. Global Integrated Networks (GIN) will be necessary in the near future to provide better integrated services. Their design requires a comprehensive knowledge of the various propagation media. Up to now radio channel modelling has been performed separately for each type of radio systems. This activity will develop a coordinated set of models, techniques and data related to the radio channel in order to improve the design and performance of Global Integrated Networks. The activity will recommend and provide the most appropriate radio channel models, channel assessment techniques and data for the design and operation of these GINs. The frequencies of interest range from 100 MHz to 100 GHz (VHF to W band) and cover optical free space communications. The target architectures include mobile and fixed, satellite and terrestrial communication systems (including optical links), satellite navigation systems and Earth Observation systems. The physical propagation fundaments will be based on experimental and climatological data. The activity will bring together remote sensing, propagation and systems experts at the European level, thus contributing to advance the state-of-the-art in the field, with a clear added value for Europe. Keywords 1) Convergence between fixed and mobile Terrestrial and Satellite Telecommunications, Earth Observation and Navigation systems, 2) Global Integrated Networks (including GMES  Disaster Management and Relief ) 3) Radiowave Propagation (including Optical Free Space Links) 4) Atmospheric Remote Sensing techniques  Meteorology       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC0802    

 A plethora of new applications for novel RF/microwave subsystems is being introduced as new communication and security systems, radar, surveillance, and positioning services are becoming available. Such systems include mobile networks (4G), wireless communications systems (WiMAX, WiBRO, WiFIBER, UWB), radar, satellite navigation systems (GPS, Galileo), and sensor networks. Theoretical advances in signal processing lead to the conception of new architectures, applications, and a better use of the capacity of the underlying media. These advances, in turn, push the performance requirements of the analog front-ends to their limits. In order to fulfil the complex requirements of the new systems it is necessary to bridge the gap between the signal processing and the RF/microwave electronics communities by bringing together experts to collaborate towards the implementation of better communication subsystem design and optimization methodologies. On one hand, analog circuit design is improved by more accurately taking into account the properties of the transmitted signals. On the other hand, signal processing techniques for novel system architectures are also optimized by taking into consideration the properties of the analog front-end. Within this context, a balanced mix of experienced researchers, selected representatives from the European industry, and young researchers is brought together, to define the future subsystem requirements, applications, and trends. Keywords: communication subsystems, RF/microwave subsystems, front-ends, signal processing.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC0803    

 The main objective of the Action  is to foster original research initiatives addressing energy awareness/saving and to increase the overall impact of European research in the field of energy efficiency in distributed systems. The goal of the Action  is to give coherence to the European research agenda in the field, by promoting coordination and encouraging discussions among the individual research groups, sharing of operational know-how (lessons-learned, problems found during practical energy measurements and estimates, ideas for real-world exploitation of energy aware techniques, etc.).The Action  objectives can be summarized on scientific and societal points of view: sharing and merging existing practices will lead the Action  to propose and disseminate innovative approaches, techniques and algorithms for saving energy while enforcing given Quality of Service (QoS) requirements. Notably the different leverages must be regarded together since they might influence each other (deliverables: position paper/survey on existing practices; innovative ideas guidelines/brochures, workshop proceedings, book on the projects topic, summer schools). The Action  will create a common forum bridging scientific societies from various origins in computer science from architecture to applications (deliverables: project wiki, discussion lists, postings at popular scientific forums, newsletters). The Action  will take particular care of the openness and the applicability of the proposed solutions in a wide spectrum of distributed systems (deliverables: best-case scenarios lists, white papers on Good practices). To broaden the Action  societal impact, it will support and raise consciousness in energy saving for different audiences: system administrators, experienced scientists and engineers, industry CEO, general public, etc (deliverables: everyday guides and leaflets, web portal and wiki, blogs of the projects partners, newsletters). To perfect the adoption of energy awareness, the Action  will devise economic studies and evaluate gains from energy savings of the different leverages (deliverables: statistical summary and overview).       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC0804    

 In different fields of science and engineering it is necessary to solve complex and challenging problems with high computational cost. For this purpose, scientists and engineers normally use homogeneous high performance computers. Nowadays, the emergence of heterogeneous computing allows research groups, enterprise and educational institutions to use networks of processors which are already available. On the other hand, high performance computers have become more and more hierarchical and heterogeneous (e.g., a cluster of multiprocessor nodes using multicore processors). These modern hierarchical and heterogeneous computing infrastructures are hard to program and use efficiently, particularly for extreme-scale computing. Consequently, none of the state-of-the-art solutions are able to efficiently use such environments. The Action  will establish a European research network focused on high performance heterogeneous computing in order to address the whole range of challenges posed by these new platforms including models, algorithms, programming tools and applications. Indeed, some of the most active research groups of the world on this area are in Europe. The network will contribute to exchange information, identify synergies and pursue common research activities, therefore reinforcing the strength of these groups and the leadership of Europe in this field.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC0805    

 Everyday life relies heavily on the reliable operation and intelligent management of large-scale critical infrastructures, such as electric power systems, telecommunication networks, and water distribution networks. The design, monitoring, control and security of such systems are becoming increasingly challenging as their size, complexity and interactions are steadily growing. Moreover, these critical infrastructures are susceptible to natural disasters, frequent failures, as well as malicious attacks. There is an urgent need to develop a common system-theoretic framework for modelling the behaviour of critical infrastructure systems and for designing algorithms for intelligent monitoring, control and security of such systems. This COST Action  (IntelliCIS) will contribute to the advancement of knowledge in the areas of computational intelligence and autonomous agents, with specific emphasis on the application of these methodologies in monitoring and controlling large-scale distributed complex systems. This will be achieved by the development of innovative techniques and algorithms for fault tolerant operation of critical infrastructures and their evaluation by theoretical analysis and simulation. The Action  will be a catalyst for instigating interdisciplinary interaction and will promote collaboration between industry, academia and research organizations on the subject of security, quality, reliability, and efficiency of critical infrastructure systems.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC0806    

 The main objective is making automated reasoning techniques and tools applicable to a wider range of problems, as well as making them easier to use by researchers, software developers, hardware designers, and information system users and developers. The Action  coordinates activities on developing infrastructures for automated reasoning about the new notion of Rich Models of computer systems. Rich Models have the expressive power of a large fragment of formalizable mathematics, enabling specification of software, hardware, embedded, and distributed systems. Rich Models support modeling at a wide range of abstraction levels, from knowledge bases and system architecture, to software source code and detailed hardware design. The Action  contributes to the construction of Rich-Model Toolkit, a new unified infrastructure that precisely defines the meaning of Rich Models, introduces standardized representation formats, and incorporates a number of automated reasoning tools. Moreover, the Action  develops and deploys new tools for automated reasoning that communicate using these standardized formats. The resulting tools will have a wide range of applicability and improved efficiency, helping system developers construct reliable systems through automated reasoning, analysis, and synthesis.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC0901    

 The main objective of the Action  is to integrate the cognitive concept across all layers of communication systems, resulting in the definition of a European platform for cognitive radio and networks. The Action  proposes coordinated research in the field of cognitive radio and networks. The cognitive concept applies to coexistence between heterogeneous wireless networks, that share the electromagnetic spectrum for maximum efficiency in resource management. Several efforts are currently in place in European research centers and consortia to introduce cognitive mechanisms at different layers of the communications protocol stack. This Action  goes beyond the above trend by integrating the cognitive concept across all layers of system architecture, in view of joint optimization of link adaptation based on spectrum sensing, resource allocation, and selection between multiple networks, including underlay technologies. The cross-layer approach will provide a new perspective in the design of cognitive systems, based on a global optimization process that integrates existing cognitive radio projects, thanks to the merge of a wide-range of expertise, from hardware to applications, provided by over 30 academic and industrial partners. The final result will be the definition of a European platform for cognitive radio and networks. To reach this goal, algorithms and protocols for all layers of the communications stack will be designed, and a set of standard interfaces as well as a common reference language for interaction between cognitive network nodes will be defined.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC0902    

 The main objective of the Action  is to develop improved methods for knowledge extraction from massive amounts of data regarding moving objects. This Action  aims to build a network for collaboration that leads to the improvement of ICT  methods for knowledge extraction from massive amounts of data about moving objects. This knowledge is essential to substantiate decision making in public and private sectors. Moving object data typically include trajectories of concrete objects (e.g. humans, vehicles, animals, and goods), as well as trajectories of abstract concepts (e.g. spreading diseases). While movement records are nowadays generated in huge volumes, methods for extracting useful information are still immature, due to fragmentation of research and lack of comprehensiveness from monodisciplinary approaches. Overcoming these limitations calls for COST-like networking. In response to a strong expression of interest from the academic, industrial, and user communities, this Action  will empower the development of substantial and widely applicable methods in mobility analysis, focusing on representation and analysis of movement, including spatio-temporal data mining, and visual analytics. Results will be demonstrated through showcases for decision makers. Researchers from various subdomains in computer and geographic information sciences will join domain specialists from a broad range of relevant applications, from courier services and transportation to ecology, and epidemiology, among others. This will make Europe a central stakeholder in an emerging key domain.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC0903    

 The main objective of the Action  is to harmonise research and practice on design and evaluation methodologies for computing artefacts, across sectors and disciplines. Third-wave human computer interaction (HCI) is characterised by a diversifying user base and use contexts, new emphasis on user experience and new interaction styles. This implies a need for informed method choice sensitive to domains, user groups and system objectives. Effective method use requires complex judgments about applicability across applications and genres, with failure implying significant financial and human costs. The adoption of ICT  across ages and abilities further increases the need for sound D E methods, which bring about useful, usable, desirable computing artefacts that improve life quality. Effective cross-sectorial transfer of design and evaluation (D E) methods is plausible and demonstrable. Relevant research work, however, is fragmented and scattered. The Action  aims to provide harmonization and leadership currently lacking in this field by bringing together researchers and D E professionals. Their broad experience of D E methods deployed in different sectors and disciplines enables comparison of method applications, assessing transferability of both established and novel approaches. These collaborative activities in Working Groups and open Workshops will facilitate production of a generic D E method selection and application framework and scientific publications reaching the wider research community. The Action  will also provide young interdisciplinary researchers with systematic training and networking opportunities such as STSMs and Training Schools.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC0904    

 The main objective of this Action  is to develop a comprehensive techno-economic regulatory framework of radio spectrum access rules for CR/SDR-based wireless applications, catering for envisaged CR/SDR deployment scenarios and shown to benefit most optimally the development of the wireless industries and consumer interests at large. Furthermore, the Action  will provide assistance to European administrations in formulating a European position on radio spectrum access rules for CR/SDR applications. This Action  will establish a multi-disciplinary European forum focused on coordinating techno-economic studies for the development of a harmonised European regulatory framework to facilitate the advancement and broad commercial deployment of Cognitive Radio/Software Defined Radio (CR/SDR) systems. The Action  will leverage on results and experiences from national and international research initiatives and early standard-setting activities by recommending sound regulatory policies that would facilitate fastest possible uptake and proliferation of CR/SDR. The need for this Action  has been supported by European regulators in the European Conference of Postal and Telecommunications Administrations (CEPT). They stated willingness to use the results of the Action  in their work on developing the harmonised European regulatory regime for CR/SDR. Very conveniently, proposals elaborated by the Action  could also be used as a part of European contributions to the forthcoming World Radiocommunications Conference in 2012, which has CR/SDR regulatory policy on its agenda.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC0905    

 The main objective of this Action  is to advance the state-of-the-art concerning networking aspects of scenarios integrating moving objects of the most varied kinds, ranging from personal use devices to sensors, into the Internet of the Future. In particular, the Action  will coordinate the development of new algorithms, techniques, protocols models and tools that will facilitate the integration of moving objects into pervasive and ambient communications. The Internet of the Future will incorporate a large number of autonomous wireless objects moving with diverse patterns and speeds while communicating via several radio interfaces. Examples of such objects may include humans, cars or unmanned aerial vehicles, with every object acting as a networking device generating, relaying and/or absorbing data. Achieving the Internet of the Future, will require global interoperability amongst objects/devices, not typically common place due to inherent features of today s Internet. To overcome the current shortcomings, a number of research challenges have to be addressed in the area of networking, including protocol engineering, development of applications and services, as well as realistic use-cases. The Action  will increase the knowledge and coordinate research efforts of national and international projects in the area of Wireless Networking for Moving Objects (WiNeMO). Its activity will foster wide dissemination of research results, serving as an internationally recognized reference point through capacity building of WiNeMO stakeholders offering appropriate networking opportunities to early-stage researchers. The results will be also demonstrated through joint living labs and show cases for researchers, decision makers and public exhibitions.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC0906    

 Parallel programming (PP) used to be an area once confined to a few niches, such as scientific and high-performance computing applications. However, with the proliferation of multicore processors, and the emergence of new, inherently parallel and distributed deployment platforms, such as those provided by cloud computing, parallel programming has definitely become a mainstream concern. Transactional Memories (TMs) answer the need to find a better programming model for PP, capable of boosting developers' productivity and allowing ordinary programmers to unleash the power of parallel and distributed architectures avoiding the pitfalls of manual, lock based synchronization. It is therefore no surprise that TM has been subject to intense research in the last years. This Action  aims at consolidating European research on this important field, by coordinating the European research groups working on the development of complementary, interdisciplinary aspects of Transactional Memories, including theoretical foundations, algorithms, hardware and operating system support, language integration and development tools, and applications.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1001    

 The tremendous power and speed of current search engines to respond, almost instantaneously to millions of user queries on a daily basis is one of the greatest successes of the past decade. While this technology empowers users need to extract relevant information from the hundreds of thousands of terabytes of existing data available on the web, the next decade presents many new grand challenges. This next wave of search technology is faced with even greater demands, not only in terms of volume of requests, but also in terms of the changes to the content available, and the dynamics of Web 2.0+ data being produced. These increased and new demands mean that search technology must be able to search, filter, extract, combine, integrate, and process multiple and distributed sources of multilingual content, delivered to an even wider global audience and variety of population. Inevitably, Multilingual and Multifaceted Interactive Information Access (MUMIA) research and development will be a key part of the next generation of search technology. Machine Translation (MT), Information Retrieval (IR) and Multifaceted Interactive Information Access (MIIA) are three disciplines which address the main components of MUMIA. However, relevant research, which is vitally important for the development of next generation search systems, is fragmented. This Action  will coordinate the collaboration between these disciplines, fostering research and technology transfer in these areas and play an important role in the definition of the future of search. To form a common basis for collaboration the domain of patent retrieval has been selected as a use case, as it provides highly sophisticated and information intensive search tasks that have significant economic ramifications. This Action  will explore innovative frameworks to empower the synergies from the disparate research fields of MT/IR/MIIA within the specific context of patent search and other next generation Web applications.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1002    

 The goal of this Action  is to establish a strong network on Quality of Experience (QoE) with participation from both academia and industry. Its main objective will be to develop and to promote methodologies to subjectively and objectively measure the impact in terms of quality of future multimedia products and services. This network will leverage on QoMEX, an already established international conference on Quality of Multimedia Experience, for researchers and professionals to interact and to report their findings on QoE issues. Observing that there are currently no European networks focusing on the concept of QoE, this Action  also aims at bringing a substantial scientific impact on fragmented efforts carried out in this field, by coordinating the research under the catalytic COST umbrella, and at setting up a European network of experts facilitating transfer of technology and know-how to industry, coordination in standardization, and certification of products and services.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1003    

 Smart Environments (SEs), like the human body, energy efficient buildings, vehicular or urban environments, are populated by many devices connected by wireless networks. The radio channel is central to SEs, as it impacts the design of transmission techniques and communication protocols. Radio communications in SEs need to be green and based on cooperative paradigms to mitigate the effect of interference and improve efficiency. This Action  addresses research issues in the field of cooperative radio communications to make our society cleaner, safer, and more energy efficient. The main goal of the Action  is to increase knowledge of cooperative communications applied to Green SEs (GSEs), by exploring and developing new methods, models, techniques, strategies and tools, in a context enriched by deep industry-academia links. Training of young researchers is also one of its main objectives, to be pursued e.g. via annual training schools. Europe will benefit from the activities of this Action , as GSEs will be one of the key components of the broader field (and exploding market) of the Internet of Things, a domain of interest to many large and small companies in Europe. COST is the ideal framework, as it allows very efficient cooperation among industries and academia.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1004    

 The natural world presents our eyes with a wide range of colours and intensities from moonlight to bright sunshine. We can see detail in regions that vary significantly in luminance. Current imaging techniques are incapable of accurately capturing or displaying such a range of lighting. Some areas under-exposed and others over-exposed. High Dynamic Range (HDR) imaging can capture, store, transmit and deliver real-world lighting. This gives a step change in viewing experience, for example the ability to clearly see the football when it is kicked from the shadow of the stadium into sunshine. Widespread uptake of HDR requires common interface standards. Currently they do not exist. There are isolated pockets of high-quality HDR endeavour across Europe, but not a co-ordinated approach. 2009 saw the appearance the first commercial HDR display and the world s first HDR video camera. These European-led developments reinforce the timeliness of developing HDR standards and the special position Europe is in to lead the rapid acceleration of future HDR developments and market penetration. This Action  (HDRi) assembles leading academic and industrial researchers and practitioners to propose a set of standards for the complete HDR pipeline and establish Europe firmly as the world leader in HDR.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1005    

 Wireless transmission via optical carriers opens doors of opportunity in areas as yet largely unexplored. Offering significant technical and operational advantages, optical wireless communication (OWC) can be, in some applications, a powerful alternative to and, in others, complementary to existing radio frequency (RF) wireless systems. Variations of OWC can be employed in a diverse range of communication applications ranging from very short-range (on the order of millimetres) optical interconnects within integrated circuits through outdoor inter-building links (on the order of kilometres) to satellite links (larger than 10,000 kilometres). In many respects, OWC research is still in its infancy and calls for extensive research to begin to harness the enormous potential of the optical spectrum. This COST Action  will serve as a high-profile consolidated European scientific platform for interdisciplinary OWC research activities, spanning from characterization of diverse propagation media to modeling, design and development of devices, components, algorithms/protocols and systems. It will make significant contributions to the fundamental scientific understanding, technical knowledge, engineering design and applications while promoting community awareness of this emerging field. Development of novel and efficient communication technologies resulting from integrated research activities made possible through this Action  will be a significant enabler for future-generation heterogeneous communication networks supporting a wide range of wireless services/applications.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1101    

 Communications and sensing in varying wireless environments require resilient, adaptive antenna systems for reliable data transmission and seamless access to various infrastructures. The emergence of new technologies in radio coding and the need for more efficient use of the spectral and energy resources shifts antenna system design towards cross-disciplinary approaches, covering electromagnetic field theory, RF engineering, signal processing, integrated fabrication technologies and even micro- and nano-technologies. With these new challenges, it is vital to review the existing expertise and direct the efforts in the right direction. This Action  identifies key research topics, facilitating the networking and coordination between different R D teams. The objectives are to assess the needs for the new technologies and applications, to foster the development of radiating systems in green, smart environments, to provide the necessary supporting technologies and to promote the career start of young researchers.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1102    

 Constant advances in manufacturing yield and field reliability are important enabling factors for electronic devices pervading our lives, from medical to consumer electronics, from railways to the automotive and avionics scenarios. At the same time, both technology and architectures are today at a turning point; many ideas are being proposed to postpone the end of Moore s law such as extending CMOS technology as well as finding alternatives to it like CNTFET, QCA, memristors, etc, while at the architectural level, the spin towards higher frequencies and aggressive dynamic instruction scheduling has been replaced by the trend of including many simpler cores on a single die. These paradigm shifts imply new dependability issues and thus require a rethinking of design, manufacturing, testing, and validation of reliable next-generation systems. These manufacturability and dependability issues will be resolved efficiently only if a cross-layer approach that takes into account technology, circuit and architectural aspects will be developed. This Action  aims at creating a European network of competence and experts on all dependability aspects of future digital systems development, promoting collaboration between industry and research. Scientific results will be disseminated using both classic tools (conference, workshop, and journal articles) and web-related tools, such as collaborative wiki pages and a repository of open source code.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1103    

 Random network coding emerged through an award-winning paper by R. Koetter and F. Kschischang in 2008 and has since then opened a major research area in communication technology with widespread applications for communication networks like the internet, wireless communication systems, and cloud computing. It allows transmitting information through a network by disregarding any of its topological features. As in traditional algebraic coding theory, two main research directions in random network coding are existence and construction of good and optimal network codes, efficient encoding and decoding schemes for a given network code. Restriction to the so-called Grassmannian codes has proven to be advantageous and leads to the theory of designs over GF(q). Worldwide, there exists a larger number of workgroups focusing on this topic, which includes several groups located in Europe. This COST Action  will set up a European research network and establish network coding as a European core area in communication technology. Its aim is to bring together experts from pure and applied mathematics, computer science, and electrical engineering, who are working in the areas of discrete mathematics, coding theory, information theory, and related fields.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1104    

 This Action  undertakes coordinated research collaboration, at European level, in 3D multimedia creation, encoding, delivery and reception of services and applications over future networking technologies. A scientific framework is devised to integrate the main elements of the delivery chain, such as 3D content creation and encoding evolution, transmission across heterogeneous networks and user consumption, taking perceived quality as an overall key performance factor. Several individual R D efforts are currently running across Europe, targeted at 3D technologies. This Action  aims at beyond this trend by tightening closer together scattered efforts and integrating all technological elements with user 3D quality perception. To reach this goal, this Action  fuels cooperation between researchers and industry experts, envisaging production of technical and scientific deliverables for researchers, scientists, engineers and managers, new business model recommendations for content and service providers through joint meetings across academia and industry, plus documentation and multimedia presentations to promote 3D technology in the society. The benefits include increased relevancy of European research, contribution to the development and sustainability of new and better 3D multimedia communications technology and provision of a platform for faster launching and adoption of related new products and services across Europe for end users  beneficiary.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1105    

 Forensics is the application of a broad spectrum of sciences to answer questions of interest to a legal system. This may be in relation to a crime or a civil action  [Wikipedia]. Since many such questions boil down to identifying, or verifying the identity, of people allegedly involved in some action, a clear relationship exists between forensics and biometrics. Biometrics developed a number of techniques which can clearly facilitate the identification of people involved in criminal actions or civil incidents. Thus, although the two communities have traditionally often operated in relative isolation, there are many scenarios where the synergic cooperation of multimodal biometrics and forensics can be successfully applied. To address such multifaceted areas it is important to develop an interdisciplinary network with complementary competences, to foster the birth of a new community which can develop novel technological solutions to crucial issues and new challenges in forensic science. The Action  will promote new partnerships, will provide education and training, will contribute to develop new standards and best practices, will produce awareness of the potential benefits of advanced technologies for evidence analysis in forensic cases and will stimulate improved mutual understanding of collaborative working models linking the academic and industrial sectors.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1106    

 Modern society is increasingly dependent on large-scale software systems that are distributed, collaborative and communication-centred. Correctness and reliability of such systems depend on compatibility between components and services that are newly developed or may already exist. The consequences of failure are severe, including security breaches and unavailability of essential services. Current software development technology is not well suited to producing these large-scale systems, because of the lack of high-level structuring abstractions for complex communication behaviour. This Action  will use behavioural type theory as the basis for new foundations, programming languages, and software development methods for communication-intensive distributed systems. Behavioural type theory encompasses concepts such as interfaces, communication protocols, contracts, and choreography. As a unifying structural principle it will transform the theory and practice of distributed software development. The significance of behavioural types has been recognised world-wide during the last five years. European researchers are internationally leading. There is an urgent need for European co-ordination to avoid duplication of effort, facilitate interactions among research groups, and ensure that the field proceeds efficiently from academic research to industrial practice. This Action  will provide the co-ordination layer and leverage the efforts of European researchers, to increase the competitiveness of the European software industry.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1201    

 Embedded systems increasingly permeate our daily lives. Many of those systems are business- or safety-critical, with strict timing requirements. Code-level timing analysis (used to analyse software running on some given hardware w.r.t. its timing properties) is an indispensable technique for ascertaining whether or not these requirements are met. However, recent developments in hardware, especially multi-core processors, and in software organisation render analysis increasingly more difficult, thus challenging the evolution of timing analysis techniques. New principles for building "timing-composable" embedded systems are needed in order to make timing analysis tractable in the future. This requires improved contacts within the timing analysis community, as well as with related communities dealing with other forms of analysis such as model-checking and type-inference, and with computer architectures and compilers. The goal of this Action  is to gather these forces in order to develop industrial-strength code-level timing analysis techniques for future-generation embedded systems.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1202    

 New and unprecedented sources of geographic information have recently become available in the form of user-generated Web content. The integration and application of these sources, often termed volunteered geographic information (VGI), offers multidisciplinary scientists an unprecedented opportunity to conduct research on a variety of topics at multiple spatial and temporal scales. Since applications generating VGI are not often designed specifically for data production or analytical purposes, the Action  aims at the following to fill this gap, recognizing the potential value of these sources to the EU in citizen-based decision making by: 1) define VGI sources, share and develop data retrieval software, assess VGI quality, 2) define standardization criteria for interoperability with other datasets, 3) identify applications and transfer these applications to business implementation (market analysis, risk management, advertising, etc.). The Action  targets fundamental scientific and technological advances by establishing a European network of excellence on GeoWeb technologies.The Action  will focus on VGI and  gather efforts carried out in an innovative and under-exploited field of Web research and knowledge production. VGI  is particularly relevant as it provides information of citizens  preferences and concerns and is an alternative source of knowledge in a context where governments are putting less resources in data collection.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1203    

 Hardware security is becoming increasingly important for many embedded systems applications ranging from small RFID tag to satellites orbiting the earth. Its relevance is expected to increase in the upcoming decades as secure applications such as public services, communication, control and healthcare will keep growing.  The vulnerability of hardware devices that implement cryptography functions (including smart cards) has become the Achille s heel in the last decade. Therefore, the industry is recognizing the significance of hardware security to combat semiconductor device counterfeiting, theft of service and tampering. This COST action aims at creating a European network of competence and experts on all aspects of hardware security including design, manufacturing, testing, reliability, validation and utilization. The network will play a key role in developing solutions responding to the hardware security challenges, hence strengthening the position of Europe in the field.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1204    

 This Action  will address the fundamental new challenges in the design and analysis of methods for collective decision making raised by recent technological advances in areas such as social networks, electronic commerce, webpage ranking, and e-governance. Computational Social Choice is a novel and innovative research trend that is now gathering substantial momentum, especially in the European research arena. It combines methods from Computer Science with insights from Economic Theory. The Action  will provide a much needed framework for coordinating research efforts in this important new field at the European level. The scientific programme will focus on four thematic areas: (1) voting and elections, (2) fair division, (3) information merging, and (4) matching mechanisms. In organisational terms, the Action  will particularly emphasise the close involvement of Early-Stage Researchers.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1205    

 De-identification in multimedia content can be defined as the process of concealing the identities of individuals captured in a given set of data (images, video, audio, text), for the purpose of protecting their privacy. This will provide an effective means for supporting the EU s Data Protection Directive (95/46/EC), which is concerned with the introduction of appropriate measures for the protection of personal data. The fact that a person can be identified by such features as face, voice, silhouette and gait, indicates the de-identification process as an interdisciplinary challenge, involving such scientific areas as image processing, speech analysis, video tracking and biometrics. This Action  aims to facilitate coordinated interdisciplinary efforts (related to scientific, legal, ethical and societal aspects) in the introduction of person de-identification and reversible de-identification in multimedia content by networking relevant European experts and organisations.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1206    

 This Action  aims at increasing and enhancing the support of the European multilingual heritage from Information and Communication Technologies ( ICT ). This general aim is addressed through improving linguistic representativeness, precision and computational efficiency of Natural Language Processing (NLP) applications. The Action  focuses on the major bottleneck of these applications: Multi-Word Expressions (MWEs), i.e. sequences of words with unpredictable properties such as "to count somebody in" or "to take a haircut". A breakthrough in their modelling and processing can only result from a coordinated effort of multidisciplinary experts in different languages. COST is the most adequate framework answering this need. Fourteen European languages will be addressed from a cross-theoretical and cross-methodological perspective, necessary for coping with current fragmentation issues. Expected deliverables include enhanced language resources and tools, as well as recommendations of best practices for cutting-edge MWE-aware language models. The Action  will lead to a better understanding of the nature of MWEs. It will establish a long-lasting collaboration within a multilingual network of MWE specialists. It will pave the way towards competitive next generation text processing tools which will pay greater attention to language phenomena.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1207    

 This Action  addresses the critical challenge of providing new devices for Information and Communication Technologies ( ICT ) applications running from sensors to photonics and optoelectronics. Traditional materials - such as liquid crystals - and devices - such as acoustic resonators -are now showing new and improved functionalities when combined with nanostructured materials. This leads to innovative devices, which broaden the horizon of the applications in many areas, from health (bio- and diagnostic sensors) to optical communications and photonics (reconfigurable optics, displays). Interdisciplinarity and improved use of knowledge are essential for undertaking challenges in the design of new devices derived from new materials. The action will develop new ideas for functional materials and devices in these areas and innovative training curricula for professionals and scientists that encourage an integrated approach to the design and implementation of breaking new devices for photonics, materials engineering (e.g. multiferroic ceramics) and sensor areas.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1208    

 The Action  aims to address efficient Wireless Power Transmission (WPT) circuits, systems and strategies specially tailored for battery-less systems. Battery-free sensors, passive RFID, Near Field Communications (NFC) are all closely related concepts that make use of WPT and energy harvesting systems to remotely power up mobile devices or to remotely charge batteries, contributing to develop and foster the Internet of Things (IoT) evolution. In this context, this Action  aims at bringing together RF circuit and system designers with different backgrounds to: 1) provide enhanced circuit and subsystem solutions to increase the efficiency in WPT; and 2) investigate the use of novel materials and technologies that allow minimizing cost and maximizing integration of the electronics with the environment and with the targeted applications. The Action  expected benefits include the creation of a wide network of experts both from academia and industry that can address the existing and upcoming challenges in wireless power transmission scenarios in an interdisciplinary manner paving the way for the future generations of wireless power transmission solutions and the associated regulation. COST is an ideal framework towards joining efforts at an international level and establishing Europe as a leading scientific and industrial community in the field of wireless power transmission.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1301    

 As more and more structured data becomes available on the Web, and Web users shift towards a more general non-technical population, keyword searching is becoming a valuable alternative to traditional structured queries, mainly due to its simplicity and the basic knowledge required from users. Nevertheless, existing approaches suffer from a number of limitations when applied to multi-source scenarios requiring some form of query planning, and with frequent updates precluding any effective implementation of data indexes. Typical scenarios include open data, big data and virtual data integration systems. Therefore, building effective keyword searching techniques can have an extensive impact since it allows non-professional users to access large amounts of information stored in structured repositories through simple keyword-based query interfaces. This revolutionises the paradigm of searching for data since users are offered access to structured data in a similar manner to the one they already use for documents. To build a successful, unified and effective solution - due to the multifaceted nature of the problem - the Action  proposes to join synergies from several disciplines, such as semantic data management, the semantic web, information retrieval, artificial intelligence, machine learning, user interaction, service science, service design, and natural language processing.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1302    

 Ambient Assisted Living (AAL) is an area of research based on Information and Communication Technologies ( ICT ), medical research, and sociological research. AAL is based on the notion that technology and science can provide improvements in the quality of life for people in their homes, and that it can reduce the financial burden on the budgets of European healthcare providers. The concept of Enhanced Living Environments (ELE) refers to the AAL area that is more related with the Information and Communication Technologies. To design, plan, deploy and operate, an AAL system often comprehends the integration of several scientific areas. The Architectures, Algorithms and Platforms for Enhanced Living Environments (AAPELE) COST Action  addresses the issues of defining software, hardware and service architectures for AAL, on studying and creating more efficient algorithms for AAL, particularly those related to the processing of large amounts of data and of biosignals in lossy environments, and on the research of protocols for AAL or, with more detail, on studying communication and data transmission protocols for AAL. This Action  aims to promote interdisciplinary research on AAL, through the creation of a research and development community of scientists and entrepreneurs, focusing on AAL algorithms, architectures and platforms, having in view the advance of science in this area and the development of new and innovative solutions.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1303    

 Currently, we are witnessing a paradigm shift from the traditional information-oriented Internet into an Internet of Services (IoS). This transition opens up virtually unbounded possibilities for creating and deploying new services. Eventually, the ICT  landscape will migrate into a global system where new services are essentially large-scale service chains, combining and integrating the functionality of (possibly huge) numbers of other services offered by third parties, including cloud services. At the same time, as our modern society is becoming more and more dependent on ICT , these developments raise the need for effective means to ensure quality and reliability of the services running in such a complex environment. Motivated by this, the aim of this Action  is to create a European network of experts, from both academia and industry, aiming at the development of autonomous control methods and algorithms for a reliable and quality-aware IoS.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1304    

 Ultrascale systems are envisioned as large-scale complex systems joining parallel and distributed computing systems that will be two to three orders of magnitude larger that today's systems. The EU is already funding large scale computing systems research, but it is not coordinated across researchers, leading to duplications and inefficiencies. The goal of the NESUS Action  is to establish an open European research network targeting sustainable solutions for ultrascale computing aiming at cross fertilization among HPC, large scale distributed systems, and big data management. The network will contribute to glue disparate researchers working across different areas and provide a meeting ground for researchers in these separate areas to exchange ideas, to identify synergies, and to pursue common activities in research topics such as sustainable software solutions (applications and system software stack), data management, energy efficiency, and resilience. Some of the most active research groups of the world in this area are members of this proposal. This Action  will increase the value of these groups at the European-level by reducing duplication of efforts and providing a more holistic view to all researchers, it will promote the leadership of Europe, and it will increase their impact on science, economy, and society.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1305    

 As increasing amounts of sensitive data are exchanged and processed every day on the Internet, the need for security is paramount. Cryptography is the fundamental tool for securing digital interactions, and allows much more than secure communication: recent breakthroughs in cryptography enable the protection - at least from a theoretical point of view - of any interactive data processing task. This includes electronic voting, outsourcing of storage and computation, e-payments, electronic auctions, etc. However, as cryptography advances and becomes more complex, single research groups become specialized and lose contact with the big picture . Fragmentation in this field can be dangerous, as a chain is only as strong as its weakest link. To ensure that the ideas produced in Europe s many excellent research groups will have a practical impact, coordination among national efforts and different skills is needed. The aim of this Action  is to stimulate interaction between the different national efforts in order to develop new cryptographic solutions and to evaluate the security of deployed algorithms with applications to the secure digital interactions between citizens, companies and governments. The Action  will foster a network of European research centers thus promoting movement of ideas and people between partners.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1306    

 The explosive growth of visual and textual data (both on the World Wide Web and held in private repositories by diverse institutions and companies) has led to urgent requirements in terms of search, processing and management of digital content. Solutions for providing access to or mining such data depend on the semantic gap between vision and language being bridged, which in turn calls for expertise from two so far unconnected fields: Computer Vision (CV) and Natural Language Processing (NLP). The central goal of iV L Net is to build a European CV/NLP research community, targeting 4 focus themes: (i) Integrated Modelling of Vision and Language for CV and NLP Tasks; (ii) Applications of Integrated Models; (iii) Automatic Generation of Image  Video Descriptions; and (iv) Semantic Image  Video Search. iV L Net will organise annual conferences, technical meetings, partner visits, data/task benchmarking, and industry/end-user liaison. Europe has many of the world s leading CV and NLP researchers. Tapping into this expertise, and bringing the collaboration, networking and community building enabled by COST Actions  to bear, iV L Net will have substantial impact, in terms of advances in both theory/methodology and real world technologies       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1307    

 The invention of the transfer resistor , or transistor  as it is know today, is considered to be the greatest invention of the 20th century, as it forms the basis of all electronic systems. The next technological revolution will come through self-organizing and self-programming circuits and systems, which are similar to biological brains in that they can learn to perform tasks. The recently rediscovered Memristor offers a computational substrate with plasticity, in which adaptive circuits can be efficiently implemented. This Action  is aimed at bringing together researchers of different backgrounds to work in unison so as to overcome multidisciplinary barriers in the area of memristors. Bringing together device designers, device modelers, circuit theorists, analogue and digital designers, neuromorphic engineers and computation scientists will enable the defragmentation of current research efforts and is likely the to bring then next technological revolution. The creation of the hardware basis for future self-organizing/self-programming systems will really open up a wide range of application areas and new industries, e.g. humanoid robots to look after the elderly, self-driven vehicles etc.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1401    

 Runtime verification (RV) is a computing analysis paradigm based on observing a system at runtime to check its expected behavior. RV has emerged in recent years as a practical application of formal verification, and a less ad-hoc approach to conventional testing by building monitors from formal specifications. There is a great potential applicability of RV beyond software reliability, if one allows monitors to interact back with the observed system, and generalizes to new domains beyond computers programs (like hardware, devices, cloud computing and even human centric systems). Given the European leadership in computer based industries, novel applications of RV to these areas can have an enormous impact in terms of the new class of designs enabled and their reliability and cost effectiveness. This Action  aims to build expertise by putting together active researchers in different aspects of runtime verification, and meeting with experts from potential application disciplines. The main goal is to overcome the fragmentation of RV research by (1) the design of common input formats for tool cooperation and comparison; (2) the evaluation of different tools, building a growing sets benchmarks and running tool competitions; and (3) by designing a road-map and grand challenges extracted from application domains.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1402    

 Recent technological advances in hardware and software have irrevocably affected the classical picture of computing systems. Today, these no longer consist only of connected servers, but involve a wide range of pervasive and embedded devices, leading to the concept of "ubiquitous computing systems". The objective of the Action  is to improve and adapt the existent cryptanalysis methodologies and tools to the ubiquitous computing framework. Cryptanalysis, which is the assessment of theoretical and practical cryptographic mechanisms designed to ensure security and privacy, will be implemented along four axes: cryptographic models, cryptanalysis of building blocks, hardware and software security engineering, and security assessment of real-world systems. Researchers have only recently started to focus on the security of ubiquitous computing systems. Despite the critical flaws found, the required highly-specialized skills and the isolation of the involved disciplines are a true barrier for identifying additional issues. The Action  will establish a network of complementary skills, so that expertise in cryptography, information security, privacy, and embedded systems can be put to work together. The outcome will directly help industry stakeholders and regulatory bodies to increase security and privacy in ubiquitous computing systems, in order to eventually make citizens better protected in their everyday life.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1403    

 Truly complex, designed systems, known as Cyber Physical Systems (CPS), are emerging that integrate physical, software, and network aspects. To date, no unifying theory nor systematic design methods, techniques and tools exist for such systems. Individual (mechanical, electrical, network or software) engineering disciplines only offer partial solutions. Multi-paradigm Modelling (MPM) proposes to model every part and aspect of a system explicitly, at the most appropriate level(s) of abstraction, using the most appropriate modelling formalism(s). Modelling languages  engineering, including model transformation, and the study of their semantics, are used to realize MPM. MPM is seen as an effective answer to the challenges of designing CPS. We aim to promote the sharing of foundations, techniques, and tools and to provide educational resources, to both academia and industry. This will be achieved by bringing together and disseminating knowledge and experiments on CPS problems and MPM solutions.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1404    

 Reversible computation is an emerging paradigm that extends the standard forwards-only mode of computation with the ability to execute in reverse, so that computation can run backwards as naturally as it can go forwards. It aims to deliver novel computing devices and software, and to enhance traditional systems by equipping them with reversibility. The potential benefits include the design of revolutionary reversible logic gates and circuits - leading to low-power computing and innovative hardware for green ICT , and new conceptual frameworks, language abstractions and software tools for reliable and recovery oriented distributed systems. Landauer's Principle, a theoretical explanation why a significant proportion of electrical power consumed by current forwards-only computers is lost in the form of heat, and why making computation reversible is necessary and beneficial, has only been shown empirically in 2012. Hence now is the right time to launch a COST Action  on reversible computation. The Action  will establish the first European (and the world first) network of excellence to coordinate research on reversible computation. Many fundamental challenges cannot be solved currently by partitioned and uncoordinated research, so a collaborative effort of European expertise with an industrial participation, as proposed by this Action , is the most logical and efficient way to proceed.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1405    

 The Big Data era poses a critically difficult challenge and striking development opportunities in High-Performance Computing (HPC): how to efficiently turn massively large data into valuable information and meaningful knowledge. Computationally effective HPC is required in a rapidly-increasing number of data-intensive domains, such as Life and Physical Sciences, and Socio-economical Systems. Modelling and Simulation (MS) offers suitable abstractions to manage the complexity of analysing Big Data in various scientific and engineering domains. Unfortunately, Big Data problems are not always easily amenable to efficient MS over HPC. Also, MS communities may lack the detailed expertise required to exploit the full potential of HPC solutions, and HPC architects may not be fully aware of specific MS requirements. Therefore, there is an urgent need for European co-ordination to facilitate interactions among data-intensive MS and HPC experts, ensuring that the field, which is strategic and of long-standing interest in Europe, develops efficiently - from academic research to industrial practice. This Action  will provide the integration to foster a novel, coordinated Big Data endeavour supported by HPC. It will strongly support information exchange, synergy and coordination of activities among leading European research groups and top global partner institutions, and will promote European software industry competitiveness       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1406    

 The growth of Internet-enabled smart infrastructures underpinning virtually every sector of economic and social life requires complex, high performance and highly integrated electronic systems.  The electromagnetic interference (EMI) will increase with the anticipated increase of clock speeds, frequency of operation and circuit density. Immunity levels will also decrease due to lower supply voltages and lower signal power levels. Traditionally the potential EMI sources were assessed in the frequency domain assuming static emissions. This is not valid for multifunctional devices with many operating modes and wideband digital receivers. New approaches that fully account for time dependence and uncertainty are needed. This COST Action  will fully address the challenges of the stochastic and broadband nature of EMI in current and future complex multi functional  systems through a coordinated international research programme specifically aimed at modelling approaches to include efficient behavioural models, propagation and interaction of stochastic field distributions. experimental methods including wideband near field probes and efficient time or frequency domain EMI measurement. The COST format will be the critical enabler for initiating and consolidating structural collaboration of researchers from universities and industries in fundamental research on time domain, stochastic electromagnetic effects.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1407    

 Real data sets from a wide variety of fields violate the idealized assumptions inherent in standard statistical theory. Robust data analysis methodology aims to mitigate the impact of such violations. Robust methods are usually developed to handle multivariate data. However, monitoring studies often contain information such as functional, set-valued, or different kinds of incomplete data. Robust methods for these complex data types are scarce and involve critical computational challenges. New models, methods and efficient, numerically stable, and well-conditioned robust strategies are essential to improve knowledge extraction from non-perfect and non-standard datasets. Applications include the analysis of climate data, medical monitoring and diagnosis, trading and financial forecasts. The aim is to create an interactive network spanning computing, statistics, machine learning, and mathematics with the necessary expertise required to develop such strategies in close collaboration with end-users. Software and guidelines will be developed. The Action  will provide European scientists with cutting-edge data analysis tools which will be suitably disseminated by disparate means such as training schools, conferences and publications. Improved decision-making tools for preventing-mitigating policies will be derived. Thus, scientific, technological and social challenges will be tackled by the creation of a proper framework to coordinate and optimize research efforts.       Information and Communication Technologies COST Action IC1408    

 Our ability to manipulate short wavelength radiation (~0.01100nm, equivalent to ~120keV12eV) has increased significantly over the last three decades. This has lead to major advances in applications in a wide range of disciplines such as: the life and medical sciences, including cancer-related studies; environmental science, including studies of pollution and its effects; archaeology and other cultural heritage disciplines; and materials science. Although expansion in application areas is due largely to modern synchrotron sources, many applications will not become widespread, and therefore routinely available as analytical tools, if they are confined to synchrotrons. This is because synchrotrons require enormous capital and infrastructure costs and are often, of necessity, national or international facilities. This seriously limits their scope for applications in research and analysis, in both academia and industry. How many universities, research institutes or even industrial laboratories would have electron microscopes if electron sources cost 100M or more? Hence the need to develop bright but small and (relatively) cheap x-ray sources, not to replace synchrotrons but to complement them. It is the purpose of this COST Action  to facilitate such developments. Keywords : X-rays, vacuum ultraviolet radiation, laboratory sources, plasmas, discharges.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP0601    

 The focus of the COST Action  is the investigation of Pb-free replacements for high-Pb solders for high-temperature applications. This comprises a study of the chemical, physical and mechanical properties of alloys containing a large number of permutations of different alloying elements. A multiscale approach will be used: meso- scale: The application of thermodynamics and kinetics to the study of alloying behaviour; the development of materials property databases. macro- scale: The creation of a phenomenological description of corrosion and deformation processes occurring in a solder joint during fabrication and service, micro- (nano-)  scale: The investigation by experiment and modelling of the initial stage of the formation of intermetallic phases at the solder/substrate interface. This will involve the consideration of diffusion. This will be most efficiently achieved through coordinated international cooperation providing a basis for interdisciplinary research. The action will increase the basic understanding of alloys that can be used as Pb-free alternatives to high-temperature solders for practical applications, for example in the aerospace and automotive industries. Keywords:  High-temperature soldering, Pb-free solder alloys, multiscale modelling, materials properties, reliability.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP0602    

 The aims of the proposed Action  are to ascertain scientific exchange between European experts that have significantly contributed to the development of a novel laser-based microscopy method, Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman Scattering (CARS) microscopy, and to establish it among a broader scientific community in nanobiotechnology. The Action  has a highly interdisciplinary character: advanced physical light interaction mechanisms will be explored and employed to provide fundamental structural and chemical information on a nano-scale for the benefit of material and life sciences. CARS-microscopy allows visualization of molecules under natural conditions without the need for exogenous markers. Instead, their intrinsic vibrations are probed, carrying information on both molecular composition and physical state. CARS-microscopy is accomplished with exceptionally high 3-D resolution, through thick samples, and with negligible photo-damage thanks to the nonlinear character of the CARS process and probe beams in the near-infrared regime. The Action  will demonstrate the potential of CARS-microscopy by compelling applications, involving 3-D mapping of the organization/dynamics of molecules in material and biological nanostructures. Keywords:  nonlinear optics, nano-science, functional imaging, laser-microscopy, Raman spectroscopy       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP0603    

 The objective of this Action  is to establish active links between European laboratories working in the field of optical manipulation and related applications and to foster and accelerate long-term development of this field in Europe. The goal is to increase knowledge about the basic mechanisms of optical trapping and to develop novel methods of manipulation, micro-patterning and imaging, to be exploited in the future bio-medical technology and in micro-mechanics. The scientific innovation concerns: basic mechanisms of the mechanical light-matter interaction; holographic techniques; nonlinear optical methods in microscopy and trapping. The potential impact on technology concerns the implementation of advanced equipment and devices for: nondestructive and non-invasive manipulation and imaging of micro-objects; patterning and templating of micro-devices; measurements in microfluidics. The scientific exchange resulting from the Action  will facilitate the interconnections between these topics to obtain new results in the field of optical manipulation as well as to pave the way to new scientific understanding and technological advancement in the forthcoming era of nanobiotechnology. Keywords : Optical Micro-Manipulation, Holographic Optical Tweezers, Micro-Patterning, Microfluidics, Biophotonics       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP0604    

 The main objective of the Action  is to form a European-wide scientific and technology knowledge platform on the topic of nano-composite materials in order to advance the R D, the use, and the exploitation of these innovative materials in Europe with a special focus on SME's. Polymer Nanocomposites are blends of different polymer matrices with nanometre sized functional particles. The properties of such nano-composites are remarkably different compared to conventionally filled polymers. Improvement of volume properties (modulus, strength), surface properties (hardness, abrasion resistance, and surface energy), dimensional stability as well as improvements of functional properties e.g. photo catalytic, optical, electrical, magnetic and thermal and improvements of permeability and chemical stability (UV resistance, flame retardancy) have already been demonstrated. The incorporation of only a few percent of nano-sized particles makes great property changes and formerly unachievable property combinations possible.  The Action  is structured in 4 different working-groups: - WG1 Nanoparticles / Interfaces: selection of matrix and nanoparticles, production of nanoparticles, surface functionalisation / chemical treatments of nanoparticles - WG2 Structure/Property Relationships: linking nano-sized structures to macroscopic functional properties - WG3 Characterisation - Modelling - Simulation: characterisation and measurement tools, simulation and modelling tools - WG4 Processing: primary processing, dispersion -exfoliation, characterisation, properties and performance of components, process control (inline), cost effective methods of processing, standardisation, manufacturing into components, management of health, safety  environmental risks       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP0701    

 The first meeting of the Managment Committe took place on 21 January 2008. The main objective of the Action  is to establish active links between European laboratories working in the field of artificial materials for photonics applications, where the structural dimensions are at or below the wavelength of light. Fabrication of such structures has become possible due to the expertise delivered by nanotechnology, which opens the way to the study of new functional artificial materials and plasmonic structures, promising progress in miniaturisation - and which will allow exploration of new aspects of light-matter interaction. The goal is to increase knowledge about the basic mechanisms of the interaction of light with matter on a sub-wavelength scale. The scientific innovation concerns: the basic mechanisms of light-matter interaction in micro- and nanostructured materials - including metals (plasmonics), the trade-off between strong localization and propagation losses, photonic diagnostic instruments, and non-linear effects. The technological impact of the Action  will lead to the implementation of advanced optical equipment and devices with high performance and low cost. The scientific transformation resulting from the Action  will facilitate interconnection between topics that will produce new results in the field of photonics and pave the way to the forthcoming era of nanophotonics. Keywords: Nanophotonics, non-linear nanophotonics, hybrid material systems, plasmonics, metamaterials.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP0702    

 Recently physicists have extended ideas of atoms and lattices to more generalized concepts of agents and networks and are facilitating new understanding of systems traditionally the province of other disciplines. Applications include, for example, competition between firms, mergers and acquisitions, evolutionary dynamics, cultural change and transportation networks. Set to undergo a renaissance in the 21st century, the area of complexity, rooted in statistical physics and probability theory is at the core of these developments. Better understanding in these areas will provide routes to greater social stability and economic well-being across an increasingly networked world. The Action  will promote discussion and research across the physical and sociological disciplinary divide by providing a platform from which the participating researchers can develop important, new and substantial research initiatives aimed at tackling these key trans-disciplinary issues. Overall the Action  will provide a unique forum for physicists and mathematical scientists to share leading-edge knowledge, experience and build up a common language with economists, social scientists, industry and government. Keywords: Complexity, competition, cooperation  conflict, self organization, emergence, extreme events.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP0801    

 Guanosine is one of the DNA nucleotides and together with its derivatives it has a high potential for self-recognition and self-assembly, as well as the recognition ability for other biologically important molecules. These properties will be explored in detail with the goal to increase the knowledge on basic principles of guanosine-assembly, to synthesize new optimized materials, and to explore their electronic and optical properties. Novel reproducible and well ordered supramolecular structures will be designed to serve as molecular-scale architectures for new hybrid molecular electronics. The key innovation is in merging the biorecognition properties of guanosine-based materials with their promising electronic properties, which opens up a wide range of possible biomedical applications. Keywords: G-quartet, quadruplex DNA and RNA, molecular electronics, biomaterials, nanotechnology.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP0802    

 The COST Action  will foster, coordinate and strengthen scientific and technological collaboration in plasmonics in Europe. Over the last 10 years, plasmonics - the optics of metallic nanostructures - has emerged as a very promising technology. Two key applications of plasmonics are the processing of optical information at the nanoscale and label free biosensing. The Action  will cover both fields of application, since similar fundamental and technological issues are at stake. Emphasis will be put on the integration of plasmonic components into CMOS and organic devices. The Action  will help bridge the gap between fundamental research and European industry; it will also develop and implement a strategy for education on plasmonics in Europe. Keywords: Plasmonics, photonics, nanophotonics, information technologies, biosensors, integration, metals.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP0803    

 The main objective of the Action  is to make optimal use of new HIPP processes through a greater understanding of the physics of HIPP processes and the development of improved products by superior HIPP coatings. Enhanced properties such as increased hardness, density, refractive index, better adhesion, modified crystal structure, and much more can be realized, as shown by Academia and will be transferred to industry, since also industrial partners are involved. By joining knowledge and resources a new generation of deposition processes will be established with benefit for nearly all technical branches due to the cross sectional character of thin film technology.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP0804    

 The main objective of the Action  is to advance novel gain materials based on III-V-N semiconductor compounds including dilute nitrides and indium rich GaInN.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP0805    

 The main objective of the Action  is to support the fundamental research on the statistical properties of particles transported by turbulent flows.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP0806    

 The main objective of the Action  is atomic-scale interface design and characterisation. Engineering of surfaces and interfaces of nanostructures remains a central goal of modern solid state physics and chemistry, since atomically controlled interfaces play a key role in the performance of nanodevices. Limitations in characterisation and theoretical modelling tools have been a major obstacle to the development of controllable device interfaces. Technology is now entering a period of convergence between theory and characterisation tools: new electron microscopy tools can provide images and chemical mapping with atomic resolution; developments in near-field optical microscopy probes enable Raman spectroscopy of individual nano-objects. STXM-NEXAFS has been used to characterise individual nanoobjects. Concurrently, developments within the available computer codes (AIMPRO, siesta/transiesta ) allow routine handling of systems with many 100s of atoms, and latest results show the promise of scaling this down by a factor of 10-100, i.e. into the range of realistic nano-objects. These developments will allow theoretical modelling and experimental characterisation at the same nanometric scale. This Action  combines development of these new tools with the expertise needed to exploit them for improved nano-interface control and novel device design. This approach will support the design and integration of novel materials of high technological relevance.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP0901    

 The main objective of the Action  is to develop new composite materials from inorganic nanotubes and polymers and to establish appropriate links and transfer of knowledge needed for application and commercialisation of this kind of composite media by European industry. Nanotubes made of inorganic materials are an interesting alternative to carbon nanotubes, showing advantages such as e.g. easy synthetic access, good uniformity and solubility, and predefined electrical conductivity depending on the composition of the starting material. They are therefore very promising candidates as fillers for polymer composites with enhanced thermal, mechanical, and electrical properties. Target applications for this kind of composites are materials for heat management, electrostatic dissipaters, wear protection materials, photovoltaic elements, etc. The proposed Action  will link together European scientists working on this rapidly emerging field to create a basis for a highly interdisciplinary research network focused on development and exploration of inorganic nanotube-polymer composites. The Action  will generate a fundamental knowledge and create widespread links needed for application and commercialization of this kind of composite media by European industry.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP0902    

 The main objective of this Action  is to increase knowledge and understanding in bi- and multi-metallic nanoparticles (nanoalloys) in order to develop combined experimental/computational methodologies for designing nanoparticles with specific structures, properties and functions.  NANOALLOY will contribute to the determination of phase diagrams of nanoalloys, to the development of controlled growth/synthesis protocols, and to the determination of catalytic, magnetic and optical properties of the nanoalloys of major interest in applications. The proposed network will establish a common knowledge basis on nanoalloys, reinforcing and rationalizing European research on the subject. Alloy nanoparticles (also known as nanoalloys) are multicomponent metallic particles in the 1-100 nm diameter range. Nanoalloys present very complex structures and properties, which crucially depend on their size, composition and chemical ordering, and which can therefore be tailored for specific and industrially relevant applications - as in data storage, optical devices and catalysis. Controlling and tailoring the properties of nanoalloys, and determining their phase diagrams, require the concerted effort of experiment and computer modelling. NANOALLOY brings together European experimental and theory/modelling research groups from universities and other research institutions to develop new methodologies for the growth, synthesis and characterization of nanoalloys, leading to new materials and applications.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP0903    

 The main objective of this Action  is to organize a multidisciplinary European scientific network of groups experienced in synthesis, advanced characterization and modeling of single-and multi-phase ferroic and multiferroic nanosystems. The goal of the Action  is to build a high level European scientific knowledge platform in the field of single and multiphase nanoscale ferroic and multiferroic oxides with restricted geometries, in which new properties are driven by engineering size, shape and interface-mediated phenomena. Ferroic and multiferroic oxides with various boundary conditions (thin films, free-standing, supported nano-particles/wires/ribbons/islands/toroids, hollow particles, hierarchical structures) and multiphase systems with at least one ferroic or multiferroic component will be produced by innovative synthesis and a top-down approach, investigated by manifold complex tools and theoretically described by multiscale modeling. Active links among European laboratories will be established to increase knowledge beyond the state-of-the art in this research field. Specific tools will be promoted to create a young researchers group with high scientific level and managerial competence, to contribute to the future competitiveness of Europe in this research topic.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP0904    

 The main objectives of this Action  are (i) to enhance the understanding of the BH-phenomenon and its impact on the evolution of our Universe,(ii) to study the fundamental laws of nature using an multi-disciplinary and multi-dimensional approach of BH research, and (iii) to use BHs as laboratories to test new physical concepts. Black Hole physics is both fundamental and broad ranging and hence multidisciplinary. The world s first open and flexible network on BH research will counteract the existing fragmentation of this research field. To attack the elementary and far-reaching demands posed by BH-related science, an overarching framework is required. It will connect astronomers from all wavelength regimes (from low energy radio bands up to ultra-high energies such as TeV), working on all mass scales of Black Holes, i.e. from the smallest structures up to the largest masses in the Universe (i.e. Quantum BHs to SMBHs), with physicists and particle physicists as well as theoreticians, observers and software and technology developers. By strengthening Europe s scientific networking capacities in BH research, Europe s leading role in the international competition will be enhanced. The collaboration of scientists and engineers in this Action  will also catalyse an increase of European industrial competitiveness to meet the technological challenges of upcoming large-scale facilities (e.g. E-ELT, SKA).       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP0905    

 In the last two decades our ability to study individual quantum systems (or controlled ensembles of them), virtually free from outside perturbations, has been transformed from a dream to a reality. Trapped atomic and molecular ions have been at the heart of this revolution, providing the key to a deeper understanding of many of the underlying principles of Physics and Chemistry. Physicists can now trap single atoms or photons, prepare these particles in well-defined states and follow their evolution in real time. Deeper insight into the fundamental scientific principles leads to the emergence of innovative applications and stimulates technical evolution. Scientific and technological applications include frequency metrology for the precise determination of fundamental constants; frequency standards e.g. global positioning; the determination of atomic ground state properties e.g. mass, life-time, spin; quantum information and cavity quantum electrodynamics. Notably, the production of cold molecules and the study of chemical dynamics at ultralow temperatures are areas of remarkable current growth within the field. This Action  will advance the frontier of knowledge regarding basic questions in order to foster the emergence of novel applications.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1001    

 Ion beam therapy offers the possibility of excellent dose localization for treatment of malignant tumours, minimizing radiation damage in normal tissue, while maximizing cell-killing within the tumour. The first ion beam cancer therapy clinical centres are now opening in Europe. However, the full potential of such therapy can only be realised by better understanding the physical, chemical and biological mechanisms, on a range of time and space scales, that lead to cell death under ion irradiation. The proposed Action  therefore aims to combine, using a multiscale approach, the unique experimental and theoretical expertise available within Europe to acquire greater insight at the nanoscopic and molecular level into radiation damage induced by ion impact. Success in this endeavour will be both an important scientific breakthrough and give great impetus to the practical improvement of this new therapeutic technique. Ion therapy provides potentially a revolution in cancer therapy and this COST action will be very significant in ensuring European leadership in this field, providing the science background, required data and mechanistic insight which is indispensable for optimization of this new therapy.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1002    

 The objective of this Action  is to foster and accelerate long-term advancement of artificial muscle  science and technology based on electroactive polymers (EAPs) as smart actuation materials, through a scientific network among leading European institutions and industries. Research and development on EAP materials and devices is a well established scientific field, bridging material science, mechanical and electrical engineering, and medical disciplines. In Europe, a number of world-leading research institutes with consolidated expertise in this field have formed an informal network, called ESNAM. A COST Action  intends to provide content and form to this network through coordination of mutual research activities and creation of a common platform for education, dissemination, early-stage researcher training, standardisation of methods, techniques and processes, along with industrial exploitation. This will represent, at global level, the first example of its kind, able to strengthen the impact of European science and technology. Partners involved in this Action  intend to stretch forward their networking activities well beyond the inevitably limited time frame of this Action , especially by preparing a road-map aimed at merging both research and industrial perspectives and needs, so as to properly target the wide-spread use of the EAP technologies in the European industry.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1003    

 The recent turmoil in global economy once more dramatically raised the currently unsatisfied demand for appropriate energy storage solutions. In these circumstances it was highlighted once more that the topic of energy storage solutions deserves to be treated with increased attention from scientists and engineers and from the society as a whole. The Action  addresses hybrid energy storage devices and systems based on innovative materials and technologies as well as on innovative system architecture.  Innovative materials and material processing for improved energy storage devices and associated intelligent  hybrid solutions will emerge from improved de-fragmentation and the enhancement of multidisciplinary and multinational cooperation during this Action . In this manner the Action  will strengthen the competitiveness of the European industry in this field and provide a framework for European responses to the economic and societal need for resource efficient, environmentally-friendly and reliable solutions for transport and energy.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1004    

 Regenerative medicine is a new discipline based on biomaterial development and increasing knowledge in cell science. NAMABIO will be focused only in the interdisciplinary research related to biomaterials and stem cells of interest for the regenerative medicine of bones and teeth. The aim of NAMABIO is to coordinate research efforts (very often loosely correlated) of several actors belonging to different disciplines necessary in order to obtain a real breakthrough in these areas. In particular the partners of the present project are scientists involved in the following activities: (a)processing of innovative biomaterials (b) chemical, physical and mechanical characterization (c) modeling of physical and mechanical properties (d) stem cells loading on biomaterials, implantation on animals, and histological and molecular evaluation (e) 3D structural characterization of tissue engineered bones and teeth by X-ray synchrotron microtomography (or holotomography) (f) Biomedical evaluation of the results obtained in (e). The networking action will be carried out by meetings, workshops and seminars, STSMs, schools conferences and common publications.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1005    

 "Quantum mechanics is certainly imposing. But an inner voice tells me that it is not yet the real thing. The theory says a lot, but does not really bring us closer to the secret of the 'Old One.' I, at any rate, am convinced that He is not playing at dice." (Einstein, 1926) . This view on quantum mechanics is now shared by a large number of scientists spanning the entire spectrum of physics, from pure theoretical analysis to cutting edge experiments. Europe has the largest number of scientists working on the fundamental problems of quantum mechanics.  They see an urgent need to create a common platform to overcome the existent fragmentation. They see the need of unifying their research in a multidisciplinary and coordinated approach, to reach the goal of a full understanding of the quantum world. This COST Action  will be the first network in the world, focussed on the foundations of quantum mechanics. The Action  aims at strengthening the cooperation and boosting the research activity among European groups working in the foundations of quantum mechanics. By combining existing research strengths in mathematical, theoretical and experimental physics and quantum chemistry, major breakthroughs in foundational questions will be achieved. The Action  will create the necessary platform for enhancing synergies among the participants, exchanging knowhow, coordinating the research and disseminating the results.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1006    

 Providing health care at tolerable cost is one of the greatest challenges facing the world in this century. Technologies that may offer enhanced quality of care at reduced cost, such as plasma technology, will be of immense societal and commercial value. This action will focus on medical and biomedical applications of low-temperature, non-thermal atmospheric pressure plasmas, in fields including surface treatment of biomedical devices, sterilisation, and therapeutic techniques, such as wound sterilisation and cancer treatment. This is an interdisciplinary topic: The Action  will involve clinicians, biologists, chemists and physicists, together with industrialists ready to exploit the results. The collective purpose of the participants in this Action  is to develop synergistic links between their research programmes, and to take full advantage of the opportunities that follow to create a leadership position for Europe in this important emerging area.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1101    

 The aim of the Action  is to establish active scientific exchange between European experts for the development of the emerging category of Coherent Raman (CoR) microscopy techniques   the optical correspondent to MRI, enabling non-invasive tomographic imaging of molecular species in innovative materials and living matter with high specificity at sub-wavelength resolution by probing natural molecular vibrations. Specifically we intend to: (i) offer networking opportunities for the scientific and technical communities of laser instrumentation, microscopy, spectroscopy, and ultrafast optics for efficient development of the broad range of technologies required for CoR microscopy; (ii) reach out to potential users within the material-, nano-, chemical-, bio- and life sciences to push CoR microscopy beyond proof-of-principle measurements, and (iii) to attract the interest of the next generation of promising scientists by outreach activities and thereby ascertain that Europe remain at the frontline of microscopy research in the increasing competition from Asia and America.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1102    

 This Action  deals with the future of energy storage and aims to set up a competitive and coordinated network capable to define new and unexplored ways for Solid State Hydrogen Storage (SSHS) by innovative and interdisciplinary research within the European Research Area ( ERA ). This Action  focuses on SSHS in light-weight nanostructured materials to discover novel guidelines and phenomena for the design of advanced SSHS systems. This Action  will exploit the potential of state-of-the-art synthesis techniques, structure analysis and computer simulations to achieve truly atomic-level control in the design of materials  structure, microstructure and chemical bonding which are crucial for the assessment of structure-properties relationships. Through the control of the hydrogen binding energy and the optimization of hydrogen transport and surface catalysis, the final goal is the development of SSHS materials with tailored properties that find practical implementation in transportation and energy sectors to sustain in medium-long terms the economies of European countries. This Action  contributes to form a critical mass of researchers, increasing cooperation and interaction to coordinate outstanding R D and innovation-based growth in the field of SSHS materials, in order to overcome the present bottlenecks for their widespread industrial application.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1103    

 Polarization of light is a key observable to access essential information that lies encoded in the electromagnetic radiation reaching us from astronomical objects. Polarimetry is a powerful observational tool that augments and complements the capabilities of imaging, photometry and spectroscopy in many fields of planetology and astrophysics. In most research fields, notwithstanding some outstanding results, polarimetry is still too often overlooked. The Action  will aim at promoting polarization as an invaluable tool to obtain a wealth of information about astrophysical bodies in our Solar System and beyond. With the benefit of the COST legitimacy, the Action  will recommend to the European Space Agency, the European Southern Observatory, national space agencies, European industry and policy makers the development and addition of polarimeters in future ground-based observatories and space missions. The current state of European polarization research faces a lack of interaction between communities working on different objects and/or in different wavelength domains. Under the COST umbrella, the Action  will set up the first network of polarization experts in many disciplines and over a wide range of the electromagnetic spectrum, foster multi-wavelength and cross-disciplinary collaborations, and make Europe the world leader in all fields of polarimetric science.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1104    

 Replacement of existing flame retardants (FR) with sustainable and environmentally friendly alternatives for  textiles in domestic, safety, transport (automotive, rail, aerospace and marine), civil emergency and military, construction and other industries requires a multidisciplinary approach from textile technology to the physics and chemistry of fire. This Action  will create an international multidisciplinary scientific and technology network on Sustainable Flame Retardancy, developing new innovative flame retardants with low fire toxicity and environmental impacts and halogen-free. A COST Action  is ideal to promote the existing cooperation in flame retardancy research, in order to accelerate growth to keep Europe leading the world in this crucial area, taking into account sustainability, safety and health, and to facilitate its commercial exploitation in Europe.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1105    

 Bubbles and drops are entities of enormous practical interest since their interfaces are met in numerous industrial processes and applications of every day life. In order to enhance efficiency, the creation of revolutionary Smart interfaces is demanded: interfaces that are easily manipulated with well-controlled size and properties. The acute modern environmental problems require attributing eco-friendly features to Smart interfaces by incorporating innovative materials or processes. The outcome is Smart and Green (S G) interfaces. The objective of this Action  is to organize a network of groups from academia and industry in order to identify best strategies and means to produce S G interfaces. Furthermore, state-of-the-art experimental, theoretical and numerical work will be combined to acquire insight into the underlying phenomena through the scales  and across the disciplines  for the implementation of S G interfaces in industrial, environmental and biomedical applications. The Action s main deliverables are the networking between groups working on different aspects of S G interfaces through organization of scientific events, training schools and STSMs, and the industrial interface to market new technologies. The professional perspectives of ESRs will be boosted through an extensive mobility program. The Action s main benefit is the endorsement of the European scientific and industrial leadership in this field.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1106    

 The world has just celebrated the 100 years of discovery of superconductivity by Kamerlingh Onnes. Superconducting materials are of special interest in the XXI century since they provide new energy saving solutions for electricity grids, transport, metrology, information/communication technologies, and healthcare.  This Action  will coordinate and strengthen scientific and technological collaboration in the field of superconductivity in Europe through a variety of organizational tools, assuring leadership in this field. It will cover fundamental issues as well as explore possible novel applications important for European industries. This Action  will also contribute to innovation-based growth in the field of superconductivity aimed at overcoming the existing bottlenecks for widespread industrial applications of nanostructured superconducting materials. The key novel approach here is to exploit recent spectacular progress in design and fabrication of nanostructured superconductors, in order to develop and implement such flux and condensate confinement patterns, which not only substantially improve the superconducting critical parameters, but also lead to novel functionalities of these nanopatterned materials.  Due to the advanced dedicated modern technologies needed to produce nanostructured superconductors, international and interdisciplinary collaboration is essential for a successful implementation of the Action 's objectives.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1201    

 Hybrid organic-inorganic (HOI) materials synthesized using soft inorganic chemistry allow a combination of organic and inorganic units at molecular/nanoscale level, thereby opening access to a wide spectrum of multifunctionality not possible with traditional concepts of materials science. These innovative multifunctional materials will have a major impact in many application domains (optics, electronics, mechanics, protective coatings, catalysis, and sensors). The nanostructure, degree of organization and properties of such materials do not only depend on the chemical nature and the synergies between their nano-units, but they also strongly rely on the interface they share. As a consequence, this research network will carry out detailed investigations of the design, control, and dynamics of HOI interfaces. Key actions for this COST Action  are: a) improved characterization methods of interfaces, b) innovative computational approaches, and simulation of the interaction processes, c) in situ  studies of dynamic aspects controlling the formation of this interface, d) role of the interface for process optimisation, devices, and applications. The research programme of this COST Action  fits perfectly with the technological requirements for hybrid materials identified by European industry defined by the European Technology Platform SusChem. The COST Action  will contribute to enhance the position of European industry R D, through creation of patents and industry collaborations.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1202    

 Soft 0.03 -1 keV and hard X-rays 1 -100 keV are one of the best tools for probing matter from the macroscopic to the atomic scale thanks to their penetrating power, spectral selectivity and ability to achieve single atom image. Apart from scientific applications, X-rays are everywhere in our daily life, from medicine, security, food safety, environment and cultural heritage. Ultra-intense X-ray free-electron lasers, plasma-based soft X-ray lasers and attosecond high harmonics have strongly changed the X-ray paradigm. Demands on optics and beam metrology are outstripping the conventional X-ray metrology pulled by synchrotron, EUV lithography and solar telescopes. This Action  will bring together and consolidate a huge infrastructural and facility rich consortium of hundreds of PIs, ERs and ESRs. New synergies between the different groups will induce strong and fast progress in X-ray metrology. Firms and standardization laboratories are well involved. This Action  will improve public and private researchers career at all stages, by increasing mobility and exchange. Five working groups will be set: X-ray spatial metrology of optics , Spatial and temporal metrology of X-ray sources , X-ray coherent and incoherent imaging diagnostics , Damage on X-ray optics , High brightness and coherent X-ray sources for advanced spatial and temporal metrology .       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1203    

 The main objective of this action is to advance novel materials, concepts and device designs for generating and detecting THz (0.3 THz to 10 THz) and Mid Infrared (10 THz to 100 THz) radiation using semiconductor, superconductor, metamaterials and lasers and to beneficially exploit their common aspects within a synergetic approach. We shall use the unique networking and capacity-building capabilities provided by the COST framework to unify these two spectral domains from their common aspects of sources, detectors, materials and applications. The key instruments of the action will be meetings of the working groups, Round Robin actions, Short Term Scientific missions (STSMs) and annual Workshops.  We will create a platform to investigate interdisciplinary topics in Physics, Electrical Engineering and Technology, Applied Chemistry, Materials Sciences and Biology and Radio Astronomy. In this common sense THz and MIR are considered jointly, the driving force for both regimes being applications. The main emphasis will be on new fundamental material properties, concepts and device designs that are likely to open the way to new products or to the exploitation of new technologies in the fields of sensing, healthcare, biology, and industrial applications. End users are: research centres, academic, well-established and start-up Companies and hospitals.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1204    

 The aim of this Action  is to establish active interlinks between laboratories working in the fields of micro and optofluidics, optical tweezers, nanoscience and photonics, bio and soft materials, focusing their work towards lab-on-a-chip systems and at promoting long-term development of these fields in Europe. The goal is to increase the knowledge in basic physics and biology from the micro- down to the nano-scale, and to develop the future generation of lab-on-a-chip devices for portable and inexpensive, but accurate and reliable equipments for: (i) diagnostics; (ii) detection, identification and manipulation of biomolecules and nanomaterials, (iii) biomedical and environmental microsensing, (iv) advanced imaging, (v) energy generation. The scientific innovation concerns advanced concepts of optofluidics and new generation of optofluidic devices integrating photonics as well as optical control. Indeed, their technologically relevant research threads are of significant interest for the academic community and the industrial R D. In order to capitalize on recent achievements and go one step forward, a platform as a COST Action , promoting interdisciplinary activities, is a relevant tool to exchange expertises and to explore new opportunities coming from each specific insights and knowledge. The Action  will focus on selected scientific challenges and will be organized in three Working Groups: 1-Integrated microfluidic photonics (new concepts of optofluidics); 2-Optical control in microfluidics; 3-Materials (soft, bio and nano) and technologies for optofluidic devices.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1205    

 Electrospinning, an electro-hydrodynamic process is a versatile and promising platform technology for the production of electrospun nanofibrous materials consisting of diverse polymers and polymer composites. This platform process can provide bio- or oil based polymer nanofibrous materials for the fabrication of innovative biomedical devices and for the fabrication of new technical applications. By forming an interdisciplinary knowledge platform, the Action  will strengthen the European R TD on electrospun nanofibrous materials and nanofibrous composites and will generate fast progress in the state of the art. The Action  will cover scientific breakthroughs and innovations in the electrospinning process itself, nanofibrous materials and nanofibrous composite advancements and the post treatment processing of electrospun materials. Applications in the biomedical and technical fields as well as health, societal and environmental issues are considered. The main outcome of the Action  will be: New integrated methodologies for designing and producing electrospinning nanofibres Databases of application-relevant electrospun nanofibre properties An up to date knowledge base on electrospun nanofibres and its applications Tutorial material for training young researchers entering the field.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1206    

 The aim of this Action  is to establish an active, interdisciplinary research network that bridges the gap between the experimental X-ray tomography community and the mathematical image reconstruction community. While the advanced X-ray imaging community (i.e. synchrotron imaging, advanced lab setups) and the image reconstruction community have each made strong progress in various research projects within Europe, further advances require the combination of efforts and ideas from both fields. A joint network must be established including both communities, where experiences, ideas and computational tools can be exchanged and cross-fertilization can take place in a concerted effort.  The goal is to develop the next generation of X-ray tomography techniques and algorithms for absorption, phase, diffraction, and fluorescence contrast imaging. As a result, both the spatial and temporal resolution of advanced X-ray imaging will be strongly increased, facilitating high-tech research and industrial applications in a wide range of fields (materials science, life sciences, biomedical sciences, etc.).  Working Groups will be formed that deal with quantitative modeling, tailored algorithm development, and practical software development. The resulting ability to disseminate algorithms, knowledge and experimental capabilities throughout the X-ray community in Europe will advance science, as well as industrial R D.         Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1207    

 The Action  aims at directly contributing to develop a scientific community in Europe working in Inertial Confinement Fusion and High Energy Density Physics. This will be complementary and synergic to several initiatives going on in Europe at the moment, in particular the construction of the lasers Megajoule and Petal in France (LMJ/PETAL facility), the upgrade of high-energy laser facilities already working, the HiPER and ELI projects. At the same time, we think that the physics related to the development of high-energy laser facilities is very interesting and fascinating in itself, opening new perspectives and new fields of research. The objectives of the Action  address Networking on one side and the Study of relevant physics on the other. In particular, LMJ/PETAL will be open the European academic community for civilian research in 2015. This will be a unique system in the world (comparable only to NIF in US) and we want to contribute to the elaboration of the scientific program for such facility over the next 10 years. No other European research program is at the moment directly covering such topics and all mentioned programs are related to "facility development" rather than "community building". Therefore we will fill an "empty slot" in a way which is synergic to running programs.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1208    

 Modern technologies, that now miniaturise to the nanoscale and into the quantum regime, have the potential to revolutionise many upcoming socio-economic challenges. Historically, thermodynamics has been highly successful, enabling the development of technologies that changed our lives, ranging from fridges to jet planes. While these applications involve macroscopic systems, described accurately by the laws of classical physics, little is known about the applicability of standard notions of thermodynamics in the quantum regime.  The aim of the Action  is to establish and grow the scientific basis that underpins future thermodynamic technologies at the nanoscale. Central for this is the understanding of fundamental thermodynamic processes for small ensembles, particularly in the quantum regime, in- and out-of equilibrium. These are topics of the emerging cross-over field, quantum thermodynamics , which is overwhelmingly pioneered by researchers currently located in Europe, many at an early stage in their careers. However, this research across Europe is fragmented and needs large-scale coordination to path the way for swift progress. This Action  is designed to bring researchers from different backgrounds together, foster interdisciplinary exchange and coordinate domestically funded European research to create an internationally leading knowledge base in this emerging and technologically important field.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1209    

 Although String Theory has been around for more than forty years, it has never been so important for physical reality as it is now, due to its novel outstanding applications to different areas of Physics and Mathematics. While the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) narrows down the experimental limits on supersymmetric particles and satellite missions such as WMAP and PLANCK probe the very early Universe, this Action  aims at creating a strong European Network focused on fundamental, forefront research exploring the role played by String Theory in Particle Physics, Cosmology and Condensed Matter Physics. The large majority of European world experts in String Theory will be involved in this Action . This will ensure a top quality research output, achieved through an intense exchange of expertise, intra-European collaboration and co-organization of scientific activities. The Action  will ensure fair gender representation and simultaneously adopt specific measures for promoting the involvement of women scientists at all levels. Moreover, it will foster the active participation of junior excellent scientists. The outcome of the Action  is expected to have a positive impact on both science and society at a European level, in line with the strategic priorities of COST.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1210    

 With a predicted ageing population and increasing expectations regarding quality of life in old age, there is an ever increasing demand for procedures such as total hip replacements, bone reconstructions, and spinal fusions, resulting from conditions such as articular cartilage degeneration and osteoporosis. Commercial calcium phosphate composites for bone regeneration are restricted to applications that require only moderate load bearing abilities. High toughness bioinert materials are used in the articulating couple of artificial joint implants, but they do not support direct bone/material interfaces or bond. To date there is no tough and strong ceramic in regular clinical use with ability to create a strong, biologically relevant, interface with bone. New advances in biomaterials, with improved processing, bioactivity and/or tailored shapes, providing enough structural integrity and bone integration/regeneration are currently in development at the laboratory scale.  However, due to the gap between academic R D and commercial production, and between materials scientists and clinicians, medical application of these new materials will never be possible unless companies and medics are involved in the development. This COST Action , NEWGEN, aims at creating the seed for the European research and industry collaboration, combining basic knowledge from academic laboratories, R D centres, medical units from hospitals, and a significant number of companies       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1301    

 With today's research and industry aiming for ever smaller objects and feature sizes, there is an increasing demand for spectroscopic methods to investigate processes, objects, and material properties with unprecedented spatial and temporal resolution as well as chemical specificity. The new insights are important for issues such as understanding life on the (sub-)cellular level, light-matter-interaction, light-to-energy conversion, or materials engineering. The interdisciplinary approach of nanospectroscopy encompasses the fields of Physics, (Bio-)Chemistry, Biology, Medicine, Nanotechnology, and Materials Science. Optical nanospectroscopy uses methods such as confocal and/or ultrafast Raman and fluorescence spectroscopy for the detection and spectral analysis of objects at the nanoscale, down to the single-molecule level. In this Action , nanospectroscopic techniques will be applied to tailored materials and nanostructures (organic/inorganic, semiconducting, metallic, hybrid, bio) to gain deeper understanding of nanoscale processes. This Action  aims at consolidating European expertise on all aspects of UV/Vis/NIR nanospectroscopy (modelling, experiment, nanostructures, materials, equipment, applications) into one coherent Action . The COST networking approach is particularly well suited for this purpose. A training program will be established to spread the know-how of applying nanospectroscopic techniques and the gained insights. In dialogue with European industry, nanospectroscopic techniques will be further developed, e.g. as applied techniques for non-specialists.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1302    

 Recent years have seen widespread efforts to understand the mechanisms of friction and tribology in micrometric structures (mesoscale) down to the realm of atoms and molecules (nanoscale), with the ultimate goal of controlling friction, adhesion and wear by design. This research has generated an interdisciplinary scientific area, nanotribology, with great potential impact on technology and everyday life. Applications include safety, economy, life quality, energy and material saving, toward a sustainable development. Europe has a strong scientific nanotribology community spreading over physics, materials science, chemistry, earth and life sciences. So far, this community lacks a chance to interact closely enough: it is in urgent need of better networking, to favor collaboration among groups and exchange of complementary expertise. A COST Action , operating beyond the national horizons, can indeed mobilize and put together the critical mass of existing human and technical nanotribology resources at a modest price, thus representing a unique opportunity for an efficient scientific investment.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1303    

 Compact stars, such as neutron stars, strange stars or hybrid stars, are unique laboratories that allow us to probe the building blocks of matter and their interactions at regimes that terrestrial laboratories cannot explore. These exceptional objects have already led to breakthrough discoveries in nuclear and subnuclear physics, QCD, general relativity and high-energy astrophysics. The upcoming generation of observatories and gravitational-wave detectors will continue to nurture innovative and fundamental discoveries complementary to those achieved through the nuclear and subnuclear experimental facilities. This Action  will bring together the leading experts in astrophysics, nuclear physics and gravitational physics to address this fascinating but challenging research area through an interdisciplinary approach. In addition to an innovative and well-defined research agenda, the network will provide a dedicated training program for a new generation of scientists with wide-ranging expertise and multiple skills oriented also towards knowledge transfer and innovation.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1304    

 Flowing matter lies at the crossroads between industrial processes, fundamental physics, engineering and Earth Sciences. Depending on the microscopic interactions, an assembly of molecules or of mesoscopic particles can flow like a simple Newtonian fluid, deform elastically like a solid or behave in a complex manner. When the internal constituents are active, as for biological entities, one generally observes complex large-scale collective motions. The phenomenology is further complicated by the invariable tendency of fluids to display chaos at the large scales or when stirred strong enough. A fundamental understanding of flowing matter is still missing impeding scientific progress, effective control on industrial processes, as well as accurate predictions of natural phenomena. Flowing matter frequently presents a tight coupling between small-scale structures and large-scale flow urging for a unifying approach. The Action  will coordinate existing research efforts into a synergetic plan of collaborations and exchanges to develop an innovative multi-scale approach able to encompass the traditional micro-, meso-, and macro-scales descriptions. Breakthroughs in the understanding of flowing matter will impact on fundamental key scientific issues, such as the glass, the elasto-plastic and the jamming transitions, as well as industrial applications including health, energy, cosmetics, detergents, food, paints, inks, oil and gas.        Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1305    

 This Action  brings together the expertise of experts working in the science of advanced materials in order to build a coherent theory and computing platform with a new common data format to model sophisticated spectroscopy experiments performed at advanced radiation sources (ARS) as well as at academic and industrial research laboratories. Complementary theoretical approaches will allow to deal with a wide variety of materials. Ultimately, the accurate interpretation of spectroscopies will provide the means to access the intimate origin of the macroscopic behavior of materials, for which a detailed knowledge of the electronic, magnetic and geometrical structure at the atomic level is a prerequisite. The platform established through this Action  will be widely available to academic as well as industrial users. Close contact with them will be kept through an extensive webpage, a series of workshops and a network of contact points at European synchrotron radiation (SR), X-ray free electron laser (XFEL) centers and neutron sources (NS). As the Action  primarily aims at coordinating and synchronizing on-going developments and research activities as well as enhancing the interaction between theory and experiment in the wider field of spectroscopy, COST is the most suitable framework to reach these goals.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1306    

 Organic photovoltaic devices (OPVs) have major potential as a principal source of clean electricity for the future. However, the large-scale introduction of OPVs onto the market is currently limited by their stability. Initial reports indicate that the required lifetime of more than 20 years is theoretically feasible. However, progress in this area has been slow, because the complex and hierarchical degradation paths involved can only be understood by applying complementary chemical and physical characterization techniques. The Action  StableNextSol aims to create a highly interdisciplinary network of academic and industry researchers to study the degradation mechanisms occurring in state-of-the-art OPVs, based on the use of complementary analytical techniques. The Action  seeks to integrate and generate fundamental knowledge and expertise to foster disruptive innovations targeted to mitigate device failure, and aims to develop new concepts for OPVs that are more stable and reach lifetimes longer than 20 years. The added value of this COST Action  will be the contribution of photovoltaic researchers at the European (EU) and international levels along the entire value chain, and of public-sector decision makers who will promote the implementation of specialisation policies and standards currently lacking in this area. This Action  will contribute to the development of the new generation of researchers in the field by supporting the cooperation and interaction between different laboratories and large European infrastructures.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1307    

 Transition-metal-oxide-based films and heterostructures are at the core next-generation nanoelectronic, microelectromechanical and macroelectronic devices expected to revolutionize fields of major social relevance as digital information and communication technologies, microactuation/microsensing and energy conversion. Such class of materials is characterized by an unprecedented wealth of functionalities, often being relevant to different fields of application, found in compounds that are extremely similar to each other in terms of chemistry, crystal structure and fundamental mechanisms. The necessity to handle the unprecedented complexity of these materials rescales efforts of solid state scientists to a higher level and poses challenges that no individual Institution or Nations can face. The approach of the Action  is based on the belief that fundamental and technological unsolved issues lie on grounds that are common to all transition metal oxides. The know-how progress should therefore not be addressed independently by separate communities concentrating on understanding single phenomena or exploiting single functionalities, but resorting, in view of the above mentioned similarities, to a thoroughly multidisciplinary approach. The Action  will network nationally- and EU-funded researches active on synthesis, analysis, modelling and applications of transition metal oxides within the ERA , allowing to: define targets, strategies and methods; reduce fragmentation; aggregate communities with complementary know-how; attract and train a new generation of researchers; establish a regular know-how transfer with private corporations and other stakeholders; built the future oxide electronics community by fostering the participation of early stage researchers and tackling gender unbalance. The success of the Action  will strengthen the innovative capacity of EU industry by making qualitatively new enabling technologies accessible for commercial exploitation.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1308    

 Among the different types of Lasers, fibre lasers are, both as research and commercially, the youngest, yet the fast growing type of laser due to several factors. This Action  will be the first arena where experts in fundamental material science, established laser and component groups, fibre laser manufacturers and end-users will be able to actively interact, share know-how and focus on common goals. We do expect to boost a series of innovations in the field. Among them we aim to cover the 3-6 micron wavelength interval, and beyond, to support mid-infrared applications and to enhance fibre performance to cover more efficiently visible and ultra-violet wavelength generation for biophotonics and healthcare. The Action  will also investigate glass material and fibre design to overcome the actual limitation in output power. The improvements will mainly boost healthcare to benefit wide society and EU manufacturing to retain and increase manufacturing workforce within EU. The Action  will mentor a new generation of researchers by providing Early Stage Researchers an opportunity to develop both scientific and management skills. At the same time the Action  will actively promote gender balance and women researchers to management positions.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1401    

 This Action  aims to structure and integrate European research activity in atomic layer deposition (ALD), bringing together existing groups, promoting young scientists and reaching out to industry and the public. ALD is a unique technique for growing ultra-thin films that is enabling new developments in high-tech manufacturing sectors such as electronics, energy and coatings. With interest growing worldwide, the time is right to coordinate European activity in this field, which until now has been fragmented, despite the presence of world-leading research groups and companies. The scientific collaborations in the Action  will cover new processes (precursor chemicals and equipment), fundamental understanding (metrology and modeling), innovative materials (nanoscale interfaces, 2D materials) and applications (semiconductor devices, photovoltaics, energy storage, sensors, protective coatings for organic elements and fibers). Networking activity will consist of student bursaries, topical workshops, conference sponsorship, joint publications and marketing. It is intended to establish a framework for this activity in Europe that will outlast the duration of the Action  and ensure Europe s leading position into the future.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1402    

 The investigation of quantum phenomena in nanophotonics systems may lead to new scales of quantum complexity and constitutes the starting point for developing photonic technologies that deliver quantum-enhanced performances in real-world situations. This ambition demands new physical insight as well as cutting-edge engineering, with an interdisciplinary approach and a view towards how such groundbreaking technologies may be implemented and commercialized. The Action  aims at promoting and coordinating forefront research in nanoscale quantum optics (NQO) through a competitive and organized network, which will define new and unexplored pathways for deploying quantum technologies in nanophotonics devices within the European research area. The main vision is to establish a fruitful and successful interaction among scientists and engineers from academia, research centers and industry, focusing on quantum science  technology, nanoscale optics  photonics, and materials science. The Action  will address fundamental challenges in NQO, contribute to the discovery of novel phenomena and define new routes for applications in information  communication technology, sensing  metrology, and energy efficiency. Gathering a critical mass of experts the Action  will serve as a platform in NQO and as such it will cooperate with industry and academia to promote innovation and education in a forefront research field.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1403    

 As a result of the culmination of several scientific and technological developments, we are on the verge of technological breakthroughs in the field of inhaled medicines that will revolutionize the treatment of many acute or chronic respiratory and systemic illnesses. However, knowledge in the field is vertically fragmented and compartmentalized in disciplines. As a result, current developments are not necessarily synergistic and supportive of each other. The prospect of patient-tailored inhaled medicines necessitates a much closer coordination of research and development activities. Simlnhale  aims to create a pan-European network of experts in order to: i) advance particle designs for improved deposition and interaction with lung tissue, ii) promote realistic computer simulations of particle aerosolization, delivery and deposition, iii) promote patient-tailored inhaled medicines, iv) promote integration of device and formulation design, and v) promote critical assessment of toxicity issues and related risks. Making a new generation of advanced inhaled pharmaceuticals available to patients in a shorter period of time will have enormous social benefits. It will also have significant economic benefits, since it will advance pharmaceuticals with higher effectiveness and fewer side effects, thus reducing health care costs in the long run, and will help sustain innovation in the industry of inhaled pharmaceuticals and inhaler devices.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1404    

 Noncommutative geometry (NCG) is at the heart of quantum physics, and its many facets and developments have widely influenced both physics and mathematics. In particular, NCG is related to a quantum theory of gravity and a possibly unified perspective on the fundamental forces of Nature. This Action  aims to create a Network with world experts from across Europe in the interconnected research subjects of NCG and gravity. As data emerges from Cosmic Microwave Background and quantum interferometry experiments, a prime objective of the Action  will be to seek measurable signatures of quantum spacetime. It will achieve a wider and deeper understanding of theory/experiment connections to produce world-leading advances in quantum geometry, and applications to String Theory, Quantum Field Theory, Particle Physics, and Cosmology. This will be achieved through collaborations and scientific activities, which will in particular ensure fair gender representation and foster participation of early stage researchers. The Action  will impact on science and society at large through the revolutionary understanding of fundamentals of space and time that it achieves, and through the organisation of a digital respository for NCG related resources.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1405    

 Nanostructures show unique tunable material properties with major and proven potential for state-of-the-art optoelectronics. Exploiting them for the challenging implementation of next generation solar cell architectures requires novel multiscale modelling and characterization approaches which capture both the peculiar features at nanoscale and their impact on the optoelectronic performance at device levels. To foster progress towards such approaches, MULTISCALESOLAR creates a new network of experts defragmenting knowledge by combining existing research activities to address key issues in in next generation photovoltaics raised by academic and industrial end users. It provides quantum mechanical descriptions of electronic, optical and vibrational properties in order to parametrize mesoscopic models for the dynamics of charge carriers, photons and phonons in nanostructures. This yields effective material parameters for use in macroscopic device level models validated at each step by experiment. This Action  combines theoretical and experimental expertise in industry and academia benefitting the European Research Area. The Action  actively addresses gender issues, and favours early stage researchers, developing their scientific and management skills. The Action  yields, for the first time, validated multiscale understanding of nanostructure properties for optoelectronic applications, with a focus on third generation photovoltaics.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1406    

 Cost-effective device miniaturization is one of the most significant challenges faced by process engineering and industry. As systems are further miniaturized, component machining and assembly become increasingly complex and manufacturing costs grow. High-throughput, economical advanced manufacturing and assembly technologies are urgently required at the industrial level. Electrochemical processing and corrosion science are key disciplines for the integration and the protection of small functional parts in complex micro- and nanosystems. A transfer of knowledge among the electrochemical community, micro- and nanosystems researchers and associated industry is timely and urgently required. This COST Action  (e-MINDS) provides a unique networking platform that overcomes discipline fragmentation, strengthens European competiveness, and ensures scientific excellence.       Materials, Physical and Nanosciences COST Action MP1407    

 Robustness of structures first received significant attention 40 years ago following the partial collapse of Ronan Point, and recent terrorist attacks have resulted in renewed international resources being devoted to the topic. Despite its importance, the engineering profession has yet to reach consensus on quantification of robustness for use in design codes and construction projects. The COST Action  aims to develop a foundation for treatment of structural robustness in future structural design codes. Building on the expertise and experience of European experts and close coordination with the European and international engineering associations such as IABSE, ECCS, CIB, fib, Rilem, ISO and the Joint Committee on Structural Safety (JCSS), a new risk-based approach for assessing robustness will be developed and a model code will be produced to guide improvements in future Eurocode revisions. This will greatly improve the efficiency of structural design, ensure the rational treatment of structural safety, safeguard the qualities of the environment, protect societal functionality and economical assets and is expected to increase the international competitiveness of the European building and construction sectors. Keywords : Robustness, structures, design codes, risk, safety.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU0601    

 Previous studies in urban development show the decisive importance of the public actors ability to mobilize the required land resources for the success of urban projects. European cities largely differ from each other in their land ownership situation, building industry and real estate configurations, mortgage system, planning culture, policies, and management tools. However, the actual impacts of those differences on the success of urban development are poorly known, in spite of their utmost importance for European long term economic growth, especially for new Eastern EU members. COST offers an accurate framework to lead an Europe-wide comparative study that focuses on (1) land management regimes and land policies for urban development and regeneration, (2) land management tools for large urban development projects, and (3) the overall assessment of the performance of those regimes, policies, and tools. This action will benefit the scientific community as well as the political and administrative bodies, the practitioners, and the main stakeholders. Keywords : brownfields, land management, land policies, land reallocation, urban sprawl.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU0602    

 The main objective of the Action  is to increase the public transport use by a better understanding of the BHLS concept and implementation, or in other words, to enhance sustainable mobility by developing new bus services within public transport networks to be able to fight or to compete with car use within Europe.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU0603    

 The main objective of the Action  is the development and dissemination of knowledge and tools to assess and promote the refurbishment of existing suburban building stocks. Suburban building estates make up more than 50% of all European Urban Heritage. Most of the buildings  generally multi-family housing blocks consisting of small apartments  were completed after 1950 using low-cost technologies and are often characterized by very poor quality, which contributes to the social decay of suburbs. The aim of the Action  is to investigate, compare, define and disseminate common knowledge concerning methods, procedures and technologies for: - the renovation and revitalization of suburban housing settlements, - increasing their value, and - improving safety and the quality of life of inhabitants. The approach is based on a concept of Quality which incorporates a multitude of factors including energy efficiency, accessibility, sustainability and multi-functionality of buildings. On the other hand, quality standards must be improved in order to satisfy user needs as regards comfort, safety and accessibility, as well as the new European regulations concerning sustainability and energy savings. In order to achieve these objectives, new specific social, financial, technical and procedural models must be developed to facilitate the decisions of local authorities, housing corporations, owners and designers. A relevant number of representative case studies from the countries involved in the Action  will be analyzed to test and validate the results achieved. Keywords: Suburban Areas, Building Quality, Housing Stock Improvement and Renovation, Sustainable Development, Energy Efficiency, Quality of Life, Safety of Citizens, Accessibility, Social Integration, Employment Opportunities.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU0701    

 The main objective of the Action  is to understand better the impacts of weather on freeways/motorways as well as on urban networks highway operations and to develop, promote and implement strategies and tools to mitigate those impacts. Adverse weather conditions can have a significant impact on traffic operations and quality of traffic flow. The advanced technologies for collecting and archiving weather data can assist the development of intelligent weather-based traffic management strategies, monitoring and control systems. In view of the paramount importance of weather-responsive tools for real-time traffic surveillance, this project will focus on the development of strategies and techniques aimed at improving the road traffic management and safety. The main goal is to mitigate the negative impacts of adverse weather conditions to traffic flows and to predict the traffic flows under adverse weather conditions. The term of 'adverse weather conditions' refers to the meteorological conditions that decrease the visibility and worsen the pavement conditions. This project will bring together researchers actively working on road networks related issues. It will concentrate on mutually complementary methodologies for modelling, estimation and control that will improve the safety of traffic networks. Traffic flows are highly dependent on weather conditions and researches on this issue are very limited in the literature. Next, traffic flow prediction by reliable algorithms will be addressed in tight connection with the traffic sensor network. This project will address also many issues related to efficient, reliable and quick exchange of information and data over sensor networks for vehicular traffic. The data are received only at boundaries between some segments and averaged within possibly irregular time intervals. Additionally, there are missing data and sensor failures that need to be taken into account. Further, with the developed models and estimators, advanced control strategies will be developed dealing with appropriate fusion of the multiple sensor data. Keywords: Traffic flow modelling, weather impact on the traffic, weather impact on the pavements, vehicular traffic, theory of possibility, Dempster-Shafer, Bayesian methods, particle filters, extended Kalman filter, road networks, weather conditions, stochastic systems, multiple models, missing data, fault detection, estimation, predictive control.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU0702    

 Many urban or environmental models are defined with the objective of helping practitioners and stakeholders in their decision-making processes. Models which represent in 3 dimensions the geometric elements of a city are called 3D city models. These models are increasingly used in different cities and countries for an intended wide range of applications beyond mere visualization. Such uses are made possible by adding semantics to the geometrical aspects, leading to semantically enriched 3D city models. Furthermore, in the perspective of a sustainable development, cities ought to be studied in a comprehensive manner taking into account many interrelations between various urban issues. This can be achieved by identifying and extracting the knowledge underlying in related data and models. Using ontologies is a robust way to achieve the semantic enrichment of 3D city models as well as their interoperability with other urban models, so that they become an effective matrix of urban knowledge in a perspective of sustainability.  This Action  will (1) create an integrative platform based on semantically enriched 3D city models, (2) use an ontology-based methodology that could be reused (3) assess the usability of the integrated platform for planning and decision-making. Keywords: 3D city models, semantic enrichment, ontologies, interoperability       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU0801    

 This Action 's objective is to foster and accelerate long-term advancement of renewable energy systems and phase change materials research in Europe through design, development, characterisation and simulation of new generation modified hybrid phase change materials for use in energy storage for heating, cooling and renewable energy applications.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU0802    

 The main objective of the Action  is to foster the interdisciplinary knowledge of Regeneration Strategies in Shrinking Cities across Europe. By promoting the exchange of scientific knowledge in Europe and stimulating new ideas in selected reference cities, the network will act as a catalyst for innovative solutions to deal with demographic change and urban decline.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU0803    

 The main objective of the Action  is to provide guidelines for harmonizing national travel surveys across Europe. This harmonization aims at improving their comparability without preventing longitudinal analyses with previous surveys at country level and therefore should increase data quality at national level. The Action  will build bridges between European countries as well as among researchers, enhancing research and disseminating recommendations throughout European society. More specifically, the Action  will (i) bring together researchers from different European countries, tackle the data needs and stimulate the network by training junior researchers, and (ii) bridge the gap between academia and society by taking societal needs into account, and link researchers and practitioners via the provision of practical recommendations and sharing experiences and best practice. The concrete outcomes of this Action  will be twofold : on one hand, concrete harmonization guidelines (related to protocol, questionnaire design, variables definition, etc) will be built from the field skills coming from researchers involved in NTSs and therefore aware of the needs for continuity with previous surveys in each country; on the other hand, these skills and guidelines will be disseminated to countries, especially New EU Member States, where national travel surveys are still to be set up so that these new surveys rely on commonly agreed best practices.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU0804    

 The main objective of the Action  is to harmonise the descriptors for airborne and impact sound insulation between dwellings and for airborne sound insulation of facades as well as to prepare a European classification scheme with a number of quality classes. In Europe, regulatory requirements concerning acoustic performance of buildings differ widely in performance descriptors and limit values. The diversity (indicators, steps between classes, grade of quietness achieved, etc.) found in the nine existing national schemes and proposals in three more countries is an obstacle for exchange of experience, development and trade. The harmonization of such descriptors and performance levels of sound insulation classes is important to make progress and would be well received by the building industry, governments and research sectors. The Action  will stimulate innovation, support sustainability through simplified research and development objectives, reduce trade barriers between Member States and facilitate marketing. Coordination of research activity, knowledge transfer, psychoacoustic evaluation, collection of data of typical and high performance acoustic solutions is necessary to make progress.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU0901    

 The main objective of the Action  is to develop better representations of the urban systems interactions and dynamics as well as new configurations of urban areas so that they consume fewer resources, emit less pollution, are more resilient to the impacts of climate change and are more sustainable in general. It is widely recognised that urban areas need to curb greenhouse gas emissions, reduce consumption of resources and adapt to be more resilient to climate change impacts   and become more sustainable in general. Whilst many initiatives address aspects of sustainability, this Action  is distinct in its focus upon assessment technologies for simulation and integrated assessment of urban areas from a multi-functional point of view at a whole city scale. Models, techniques and tools that are required to enable management of the highly connected technological, human and natural systems that make up cities are now emerging. Meanwhile, planning decisions are being made without sufficient understanding of long term changes, impacts and uncertainties. The implications for sustainability within Europe and internationally are critical. This COST Action  will build a new European coalition of researchers equipped to address the intricate challenge of integrated assessment in cities. Whilst cultivating a diversity of multi-disciplinary approaches this coalition will develop collective understanding, share techniques and work jointly in disseminating results. This Action  is a timely opportunity and suitable mechanism to take European research on urban integrated assessment from its current infant and rather fragmented state to being a consolidated and internationally leading activity.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU0902    

 The main objective of the Action  is to develop, implement and promote the use of methods and procedures for supporting the use of traffic simulation models, especially on the topics of model calibration and validation. To this date, the bulk of resources and effort in the field of traffic simulation have focused on "model development", leading to many simulation models being available on the market. These models are extensively used in applications that have great potential impact on the safety, capacity and environmental efficiency of the road system. However the fidelity of results and conclusions drawn from a simulation study, as well as the range of possible applications the tools can reliably be used for, are questionable: the same simulation study carried out by different people, even when using the same tool, is likely to give different results. Thus, the trustworthiness of the results almost entirely depends on the ability of the model users and on their intuition. Moreover, the increasing complexity of models makes appropriate and correct use a difficult task even for experts, requiring very specific calibration and validation methodologies. For these reasons the main objective of this Action  is to develop, implement and promote methodologies and procedures to support the use of traffic simulation, especially on the topics of calibration and validation. To this aim the sharing and exchanging of available traffic datasets will also be a key task of the Action .       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU0903    

 The main objective of this Action  is to break down the barrier preventing the exchange of information and experience between researchers from different disciplines on the one hand and between academia and practitioners (including fire-fighters) on the other hand. Thanks to the exchange of international experience, ideas and state-of-the-art on fire risk concepts and assessment methods, the Action  aims at providing concrete applications of the performance-based fire safety design methods to practitioners and at introducing the latest research into standards for fire design. Fire engineering researchers are specialists working in specific areas, such as fire dynamics, structural fire engineering, active/passive fire protection, environmental protection and human response. Since the background sciences of these disciplines are different at present there is little interaction between researchers. Practitioners, including fire engineers and building/fire control authorities, tend to consider fire safety as a whole, but lack in-depth awareness of recent advances in research. Through encouraging integration of different aspects of fire engineering and response, the Action  will enable researchers with different fields of expertise and coming from different countries to understand better the recent advances in research in parallel fields, as well as their limitations, so that they see their own research in context, and identify opportunities in involvement of early-stage researchers and application of the results in national standards. Practitioners, fire fighting authorities and building control authorities will benefit from exposure to advanced research findings, discussion with the research community, and the sharing of best practice and others  experiences. On the other side their input will make researchers aware of real-world constraints, as well as current requirements for new research and for the development of European standards.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU0904    

 The main objective of this Action  is to provide a strong contribution to the ongoing development of innovative high performance structural glass products mainly in architectural and solar applications, and to European standards in this field. The Action  will identify and share the outcomes of existing fragmented activities within the European research community. In addition, the Action  will establish a diverse multi-disciplinary network that will encourage new research and collaborations. Finally, the Action  will strengthen the current and future generations of European glass designers by developing a structural glass educational pack for university curricula across Europe. The STRUCTURAL GLASS Action  will result in high impact scientific and engineering advances. In addition, the STRUCTURAL GLASS Action  is expected to result in substantial benefits with respect to economics, well-being and the environment. More specifically, the Action  will strengthen Europe s leading position in the growing market of architectural glass manufacture, building fa ades and renewable energy applications by developing European design methods and novel high-performance products. This Action  will directly contribute to safer products and risk analysis-based design methods. In doing so, it will reduce glass-related injuries, which generally constitute an unacceptably high proportion of casualties in extreme loading events. Finally, the research themes supported by this COST Action  will directly lead to a reduction in embodied energy and will contribute to reducing energy demand in buildings.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU0905    

 While Public Private Partnerships (PPP) are now used in many countries for Transport capital projects, research has been, in principal, descriptive. PPPs are complex contractual arrangements extending into an unpredictable future and the economic crisis has highlighted many shortcomings. The scope of this proposal is to develop the theoretical basis for PPPs in the transport sector. Key objectives to be addressed on a national and modal perspective by the three  working groups are: (i) A decision making process for selection, implementation and operation of PPP transport projects considering sustainable procurement  and value propositions ; (ii) Identification of critical success factors, test criteria and knowledge-bases for improved PPP performance; (iii) Implications of the financial arrangement. Findings are cross-studied by auxiliary working groups focusing on the national context and the modal (urban, surface and port) context, respectively.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1001    

 Accessibility concepts are increasingly acknowledged as fundamental to understand the functioning of cities and urban regions. In particular, accessibility instruments are able to provide a framework for understanding the reciprocal relationships between land use and mobility. Such a framework has important potential advantages when transferred to the realm of urban planning. However, despite the large number of instruments available in literature, they are not widely used to support urban planning practices. Significant benefits are expected, both in terms of process - the establishment of bridges between scholars and practitioners from different approaches and different domains - and in terms of results - insights on how to improve the relevance of accessibility instruments for urban planning practices.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1002    

 Megaprojects are extremely large-scale investment projects that typically cost more than EUR 0.5 billion. Megaprojects are united by their extreme complexity (both in technical and human terms) and by a long record of poor delivery. Their inability to be designed appropriately and delivered on time and to budget has profound implications not only for the construction organisations delivering them but also for the client organisations commissioning them (which are often governments spending public money.) This Action  seeks to bring together multi-disciplinary researchers from across COST Countries  to tackle the issues of megaproject design and delivery. The Action  will produce immediate guidelines to influence practice and a framework to guide future decisions on resourcing EU research in megaproject design and delivery.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1003    

 The challenge of sustainability that the European Union is facing calls for a shift of the demand for mobility from individual to collective means of transport. Hence more attractive public transport systems are required, above all in urban contexts. Since a shortage of funds for public transport is envisaged for the next years, efforts are needed to allocate money in the most effective and efficient way. Transit assignment models describe and predict the patterns of network usage by passengers, which are a fundamental input for transport planning. The models currently used do not take adequately into consideration the effects brought about by the increasingly advanced and widespread Intelligent Transportation Systems on transit operations and on transit user behaviour, nor do they exploit to the full the amount of high quality data made available by the new technologies. This deficiency can delay the realisation of the benefits of enhanced passenger information provision. This Action  gathers together researchers in the field of transport and urban and regional planning, transport operators and authorities, consultancies and software developers with the main aim of giving rise to and of disseminating a new generation of transit assignment models tailored to the era of Intelligent Transport Systems.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1004    

 Cycling is an excellent sustainable alternative to driving. Cyclists have few safety options, of which a helmet is one. However, there are strong indications that law-mediated increases of helmet usage for cyclists cause confounding factors which temper the positive effect of these helmets on head and brain injury. Furthermore, current helmet design is suboptimal. Since several fields are important to bicycle helmet optimization, a combined effort involving all of these is necessary; so that a given parameter is not optimized at the cost of another. Finally, the attitudes of cyclist towards helmets will be focused upon; providing tools for improving helmet usage. The multidisciplinary approach respects the complex nature of the issue, it is unique in Europe, and will provide more complete information to legislators, manufacturers, end-users, and scientists, ultimately leading to increased safety for cyclists.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1101    

 A current, well recognised societal problem is the frequent failure of road transportation networks, resulting from traffic incidents, system overloading and lack of optimised support systems. The aim of this Action  is to unite and align groups across Europe from computer science, engineering and transport studies into a world leading research community that will develop new ways of designing Road Transportation Support (RTS) systems based on the ideas of autonomic  systems . If used as a platform on which to implement leading edge RTS technologies, such systems have the potential to deliver savings in the cost of system configuration, maintenance, and infrastructure, while potentially improving network efficiency and reducing the chances of human error.  Using an autonomic approach to RTS is a novel and very ambitious idea requiring interdisciplinary community building, hence the need for COST, and a European dimension. This Action  will bring together disparate strands of research into an integrated discipline, putting Europe at the leading edge of autonomic transportation system development.  Additionally it will have the wider benefit of producing a transformative change within the field of autonomic systems itself that will translate to other application areas such as energy management.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1102    

 The Light Rail Transit (LRT) is spread in many countries all over the world, and particularly in Europe. Some historical networks have a very long experience and others are (re)discovering LRTs with a high disparity in terms of institutional and economical contexts, safety management, operational monitoring and technical choices. In this context, the Action  aims at improving LRT safety and reducing the impact of their conflicts with other public space users. This can be achieved by sharing European experiences on LRTs' accidents and their interaction with public space, practices and operating methods, taking into account the different cultural and historical contexts. Through exchanges with other LRT specialists on available data and results, analysis and comparisons on accident and incident data, the Action  will allow to give the greatest safety benefits for best costs. This Action  is built on a bottom-up approach in order to give practical results and solutions to operators and authorities. Beyond internal exchanges, communication and dissemination of outcomes by various means (guidelines, recommendations, website ) will allow to reach most concerned actors at the EU level. It will also encourage a common approach and possible transpositions of some good practices in a context of internationalisation.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1103    

 Low carbon technology is advancing. Government policy throughout the world needs to achieve considerable reductions in CO2 emissions over a relatively short time scale to avoid catastrophic climate change.  The built environment needs to play a major role in CO2 reductions and needs to be addressed at a large scale. A broad set of issues have a significant impact on the successful adoption of new technologies and processes on a larger scale to create a low carbon built environment, including a lack of flexibility and shortage of skills in the supply chain, a misunderstanding of capital and operational costs, where technologies can be implemented, the impact on quality of life and policy and planning for the future. These need to be understood to enable technologies to be widely applicable and transferable within and between regions. This Action  will investigate the drivers and barriers that may impact on the long term creation of low carbon regions in Europe. It will identify what can be done to assist the large scale implementation of low carbon technologies and processes. The main focus will be on new and retrofit of existing buildings, their operation, embodied energy and potential for using low and zero energy supply.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1104    

 The socio-economic quest towards developing transportation with lower CO2 emission is a global goal of the EU and a crucial ingredient for the competitiveness of the whole European transportation industry. It forces an increased focus on alternative powering systems such as electric and hybrid drives. To be competitive, however, such vehicles must have an acceptable Noise, Vibration and Harshness (NVH) behaviour, not only inside the vehicle, but also outside if it is nor to pose major concerns regarding safety of weaker road users such as two-wheelers and pedestrians. Most of the NVH design and problem-solving knowledge gathered has concentrated on internal combustion vehicles and so novel analysis techniques have to be developed for vehicles with these new drives. In addition the limited knowledge on electric and hybrid vehicles is scattered all over Europe. The aim of this Action  is to engage NVH experts from vehicle industry and renowned research groups in the accumulation, development and dissemination of such novel techniques. The COST framework provides the unique opportunity to bring together experienced academic and early-stage researchers, EU authorities for transport regulations, independent consultants, experienced representatives from industry and associations of transporters.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1105    

 The main objective of the Action  is to create a research platform on which Allotment Gardens (AG) and their relevance for sustainable urban development in Europe will be comprehend and managed, and also their impacts from social, ecological and urban design perspectives will be studied. During the last 20 years, there can be seen both, a revival of interest in AG by urban residents especially in large cities and a simultaneous competition from other kinds of land use. The multi-character and partly contradictory nature of the AG makes it a relevant issue to be studied within different European urban contexts. Through selected case studies and in-depth research (into the areas of policy and urban development, sociology, ecology, urban design), the initiative will showcase the state-of-the-art, challenges and opportunities. The relevance and potential of AG for urban development so far has not been studied from a European perspective. The Action  will contribute to a better understanding of framing conditions for policy measurements in different European countries through different outputs such as the development of a Comparative Rating System.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1201    

 There is an urgent need to assess the risks posed by climate change on our already ageing infrastructure and to plan adaptations that both increase safety and reduce the cost of repairs. Engineered slopes (cuttings, embankments, flood defences) are a critical component of this infrastructure. Many of these slopes are now exhibiting excess deformation, which are threatening the serviceability of the infrastructure and dwellings nearby and causing delays and subsequent economic loss to European industry and the general public, while posing a safety hazard. The aim of the Action  is to build a coalition of researchers equipped to address the challenges of engineered slope infrastructure resilience and adaptation to climate change. This group will develop collective understanding, share techniques, facilities and data, and work jointly in disseminating results across the EU and to asset owners. Ultimately, the Action  will enable infrastructure asset owners to make evidence based investment and adaptation decisions to improve resilience and safety.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1202    

 The objective of this Action  is to contribute to structuring existing knowledge and develop innovative approaches on how  to build more secure and safe cities. Studies have proved that there is a correlation between the structure and organization of urban space and crime: new criminological theory supports this point of view. The Justice and Home Affairs Council of the EU has underlined that crime prevention through design is a successful and effective strategy for crime prevention and needs to be supported. Despite this, new projects are being implemented all over Europe without considering safety criteria, creating urban areas where crime and fear of crime make life difficult. The Action   will develop new  knowledge and innovative approaches putting together  theoretical thinking and practical experience. Thus the  scientific  program  forecasts to work simultaneously on one hand on the innovative approaches deriving from research and experts, on the other hand on the know-how acquired through  best  practical experience of participating countries. This will be done through lectures,  seminars, focused working groups as well as a workshop. Dissemination of awareness is an important aspect for working in the field of CP- UDP field and the Action  devotes quite an effort on this issue. Central to this Action  is the  training of young people, for this purpose a Junior network as  well as specific training are forecasted. N.B. The term crime, according to the most recent definitions, covers a wide range: proper crime, anti-social behaviours, conflicts, fear of crime and other harmful behaviours.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1203    

 Cities are the future. In 2008, the percentage of people living in urban areas surpassed those living rural communities. These trends are expected to continue; the United Nations estimates that over 70% of the world s population will be living in towns and cities by 2050. Not surprisingly cities elicit ever greater attention from government, researchers, and industry. Many of the initiatives focus upon the efficient use of resources and carbon reduction in response to climate change such as Europe 2020 and the European Covenant of Mayors  commitment to energy efficiency. Likewise the "Smart City" concept offers a similar if somewhat broader vision of a more efficient city. The focus upon smarter and more efficient cities is important, but incomplete. It is important that cities be sustainable and pleasant to live within. Against this background, the Action  builds on an ESF  exploratory workshop on the emerging theme of smart and liveable cities . Supported by a European network of candidate cities, the Action  co-ordinates a trans-disciplinary network of experts and non-experts that investigate the alignment of the hardware  and software  of a city with user needs to promote well being, good health, and a sustainable use of resources, within an evolving people-centred consultation framework for economic, cultural, and political development.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1204    

 Energy use in buildings represents 40% of the total primary energy used in the EU and therefore developing effective energy alternatives is imperative. Solar thermal systems (STS) will have a main role to play as they contribute directly to the heating and cooling of buildings and the provision of domestic hot water. STS are typically mounted on building roofs with no attempt to incorporate them into the building envelope, creating aesthetic challenges and space availability problems. The Action  will foster and accelerate long-term development in STS through critical review, experimentation, simulation and demonstration of viable systems for full incorporation and integration into the traditional building envelope. Viable solutions will also consider economic constraints, resulting in cost effective Building Integrated STS. Additionally, factors like structural integrity, weather impact protection, fire and noise protection will be considered.  The most important benefit of this Action  is the increased adoption of RES in buildings. Three generic European regions are considered; Southern Mediterranean, Central Continental and Northern Maritime Europe, to fully explore the Pan-European nature of STS integration. The Action  consortium presents a critical mass of European knowledge, expertise, resources, skills and R D in the area of STS, supporting innovation and conceptual thinking.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1205    

 Increasing urbanisation throughout the world challenges the sustainable development and resilience of cities. Despite this, the importance of the ground beneath cities is under-recognised and often overlooked. The main aim of the Action  is to provide a long-needed contribution to greater interaction and networking, and so transform the relationship between experts who develop urban subsurface knowledge and those who can benefit most from it - urban decision makers, practitioners and the wider research community. The Action  will establish a network to co-ordinate, integrate and accelerate the world-leading research into modelling the subsurface taking place in European institutions and to develop a Toolbox to enable subsurface knowledge to be widely disseminated. Thus, to maximise the economic, social and environmental benefits of urban subsurface resources and ecosystem services on which cities depend, the Action  will: Draw together collective research capabilities in 3D/4D characterisation, prediction and visualisation of the subsurface Deliver this in appropriate forms Provide training and continuing support and advice to better inform and empower decision makers and other end-users Foster development of policy which reflects the importance of the urban subsurface Recommend the basis for improved availability, initial use and re-use of subsurface data.                 Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1206    

 Construction is rapidly becoming the leading outlet for FRP composites. Although the use of composite materials in construction started in the 1980s, civil engineers only recently started gaining confidence in this technology for use in primary structural applications. Despite the considerable technological developments in this field, there are still key scientific and logistical issues that need to be addressed for the widespread acceptance in construction. For example, existing design recommendations are largely based on work carried out more than fifteen years ago on first generation reinforcing products and their conservativeness is hindering the development of innovative and more efficient products and design solutions. This Action  aims to: coordinate European research in the field; develop and maintain a critical mass of researchers; offer a link between academia and industry; and develop a new generation of design guidelines based on European Standards. This will facilitate the adoption of European products not only in Europe but also internationally and help Europe stay one step ahead of International competitors.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1207    

 This Action  focuses on the exchange of scientific-technical knowledge and experience of Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) techniques in Civil Engineering (CE). The project will be developed within the frame of a unique approach based on the integrated contribution of University researchers, software developers, geophysics experts, Non-Destructive Testing equipment designers and producers, end users from private companies and public agencies. In this interdisciplinary Action , advantages and limitations of GPR will be highlighted leading to the identification of gaps in knowledge and technology. Protocols and guidelines for EU Standards will be developed, for effective application of GPR in CE. A novel GPR will be designed and realized: a multi-static system, with dedicated software and calibration procedures, able to construct real-time lane 3D high resolution images of investigated areas. Advanced electromagnetic-scattering and data-processing techniques will be developed. The understanding of relationships between geophysical parameters and CE needs will be improved. Freeware software will be released, for inspection and monitoring of structures and infrastructures, buried-object localization, shape reconstruction and estimation of useful parameters. A high level training program will be organized. Mobility of early career researchers will be encouraged. The project has already received the interest of key end users and excellent EU Institutions.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1208    

 Understanding the equity  implications of transport policies  and investments is becoming increasingly important, as underscored by social movements around the world. This poses a major challenge in the assessment and appraisal of transport projects and policies, in which equity issues are currently hardly addressed. In fact, current evaluation methods in transport do not account for equity issues, and this topic is not dealt with in EU guidebooks for project evaluation. Only Germany, as an exception, considers equity between regions (Lender), but not in terms of accessibility to key life activities within an urban region. This Action  proposal contributes to the body of research by bringing together new approaches to incorporate equity consideration in transport project evaluation and decision making. The approaches consist of the measurement of accessibility with the literature on social justice, travel behaviour models and socio-economic impacts analysis in line with mainstream welfare economics. The three main objectives of this Action  proposal are: 1) to establish a methodology to explore the links between transport accessibility and distributional factors; 2) to develop new transport evaluation criteria accounting for accessibility in the social welfare function; 3) to help embed equity assessment into future transport policies and investments.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1209    

 The depletion of energy resourses and raw materials has a huge impact on the building market. In the development of new synthetic building materials the reuse of various (waste) residue streams becomes a necessity. This COST initiative stimulates the collaboration of scientists, industries and regulators to gather knowledge, experiences and technologies, to stimulate research on the reuse of residues containing enhanced concentrations of natural radionuclides (NORM) in tailor-made building materials in the construction sector while considering the impact on both external gamma exposure of building occupants and indoor air quality. By improving radiological impact assessment models for the reuse of NORM residues in building materials we hope to further stimulate justified uses of NORM residues in different types of newly developed building materials. Based on these models, we aim at investigating realistic legislative scenarios so that the authorities concerned can allow reuse pathways for NORM that can be accepted from a radioprotection point of view in concordance with the Lead Marked Initiative (LMI) and sustainable construction.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1301    

 Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS) have a significant potential in the development of ITS and mobility services, expected to deliver many benefits including reducing congestion, increasing capacity and improving safety. The road sector is estimated to represent more than 50% of the GNSS market and 75% when we consider the mobility services on smartphones. However, the current lack of a pan-European certification process underpinned by agreed standards is impeding the realisation of the expected benefits. The main reason for this is the complexity of defining and assessing GNSS performance which is highly influenced by the environment and operational scenario. Although standardisation activities have been initiated in Europe on this topic, many scientific issues are still open and require a common agreement. This Action  brings together experts in GNSS, ITS and mobility to address the open issues and guarantee the success of the standardisation for underpinning certification initiatives. The Action  will provide 4 deliverables and will propose a unified framework for definition and assessment of performance for the GNSS-based positioning terminals. This framework is expected to pave the way for certified terminals, which is expected to result in a significantly accelerated use of GNSS-based ITS and mobility applications.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1302    

 The urban built environment is being transformed by building skins derived from textile architecture. Working from a basis of tensioned membranes, these highly efficient structural forms are now being integrated with multi-disciplinary technologies to form new multi-functional systems that address the needs and global challenges of the urban built environment. The rapid emergence of lightweight building skins is in response to factors associated with climate change, energy, and workplace health and well-being, and is directly linked to advances in material development, analysis tools, and skills in design. These advances, led by European organisations, universities, companies, and SMEs, have, however, been somewhat fragmented. There is now a need to synthesise the current innovations and technologies from which to establish a platform on which the development of new advancements, products, and applications can be stimulated and produced. The aim of the Action  is to build a coalition of researchers, academics, architects, engineers, contractors, asset owners, and policy makers that creates this platform. It will be achieved through the sharing of expertise, techniques, facilities and data, by establishing technical consensus, and developing European standardisation for the analysis, design, and realisation of multi-functional building skins.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1303    

 The Action  aims to merge the efforts of the European research groups working on the Wind Energy Technology and the pathways to introduce it by means of robust applications to the urban and suburban built environment, thus enhancing the concept of Smart Future Cities. This Action  revisits safe, cost-effective and societally accepted wind energy technology for consideration in the design and development of the future urban/suburban habitat. The principal objective of WINERCOST is to collect the existing expertise on the Built environment Wind energy Technology (BWT) recently developed as a follow-up of the Onshore/Offshore Wind Energy Technology (ON/OFF-WET) and to investigate effective adoption methods for enabling the concept of Smart Future Cities. In addition, the utmost important issue of the social acceptance strategy will be scrutinized in close collaboration with municipality authorities, industry, manufacturers as well as the international wind energy organisations and platforms. A meticulously developed dissemination plan centrally based on the Action 's website, scientific publications in international journals, conferences and training schools, as well as the motivation of senior prominent experts, early stage researchers and opinion makers and involvement of industry and city authorities leaders to enhance the relevant social acceptance strategy.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1304    

 The past decade has gone through rapid ICT  developments, which had wide societal impacts. ICT  enhanced the shift from social groups defined by location to individually-based social networks.  High-speed telecoms allow for ad-hoc personalised networks that affect travel behaviour. Unfortunately, research has lagged behind ICT  advances, as our understanding of current travel behaviour is limited and existing urban mobility solutions cater to population behaviour that no longer exists. The transport demand models used today are based on inadequate understanding of the new social structure.  A new transport paradigm is needed for the ultra-urbanized smart city. This Action  aims to initiate a new collaboration framework for the various EU research groups that develops a new transport paradigm based upon ICT  social networks and their subsequent travel behavior in the urban environment. The goals are to explore ways in which social activities become mobilised in space,   identify how social ties affect the integration of local public transport into urban patterns,  and develop a rigorous conceptual framework for new ideas and methodologies.  This work will be achieved by creating a joint discussions platform that includes seminars, thematic working groups, discussion sessions, workshops and publishing scientific results.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1305    

 The Action 's main objective is to create a research platform on the relationship between Information and Communication Technologies ( ICT ) and the production of public open spaces, and their relevance to sustainable urban development. The impacts of this relationship will be explored from social, ecological and urban design perspectives. ICT  is a driving force, media and tool, which operates as a mediator between users and their virtual and real worlds. Public spaces have multiple functions, including social gathering places where outdoor interactions between people can occur and communication and information exchange can take place. The relationship between ICT  devices and public open spaces is not new but is growing at a rapid pace, becoming a challenge for ICT  experts, spatial planners and social scientists. ICTs cause and enable innovative outdoor social practices which challenge spatial and social experts to use them in policies, methodologies, design and research to produce responsive and inclusive urban places. The Action  deals with opportunities and risks ICTs offer to the user, via the appreciation, design and usage of public spaces. It exploits the benefits of interweaving a green experience with digital engagement via sharing knowledge, experiences and ideas, and analysing public spaces.        Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1306    

 In response to climate change, limited fossil fuels, and rising energy demand and prices, renewable energy is heavily promoted throughout Europe. While objectives to boost renewable energy and trans-European energy networks are ambitious, it is increasingly understood that public acceptance becomes a constraining factor, and general support for green energy does not always translate into local support for specific projects. Perceived landscape change and loss of landscape quality have featured heavily in opposition campaigns in many European countries, even though renewable energy can facilitate sustainable development, especially in disadvantaged regions rich in wind, water, biomass, geothermal or solar energy. This Action  investigates the inter-relationships between renewable energy production and landscape quality, and the role of public participation for the acceptance of renewable energy systems. The Action  will develop a better understanding of how landscape protection and management, and renewable energy deployment can be reconciled to contribute socio-environmentally to the sustainable transformation of energy systems. This Action  will consolidate and extend knowledge from a pan-European perspective using a modular methodological framework. This Action  will enhance the science base for decision-making, and develop guidelines for public participation in planning renewable energy systems. The potential of sustainable landscape development, with innovative land uses producing synergies for landscape quality and renewable energy, will be revealed.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1401    

 This COST Action  enhances the benefit of Structural Health Monitoring (SHM) by novel utilization of applied decision analysis on how to assess the value of SHM - even before it is implemented. This improves decision basis for design, operation and life-cycle integrity management of structures and facilitates more cost efficient, reliable and safe strategies for maintaining and developing the built environment to the benefit of society. SHM is increasingly applied for collecting information on loads and aggressive environments acting on structures, structural performances, deterioration processes and changes in the use of structures. However, there is an urgent need to establish a better understanding of the value of SHM before its implementation, together with practically applicable methods and tools for its quantification. This Action  thus aims to develop and describe a theoretical framework, together with methods, tools, guidelines, examples and educational activities, for the quantification of the value of SHM. The COST Action  will be conducted with the support of the Joint Committee on Structural Safety (JCSS). The networks of researchers and industries established during COST Actions  TU0601, C26, E55 and E24, the EU FP7  project IRIS, the Marie Curie Network SmartEn and the JCSS will ensure visibility, impact and dissemination.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1402    

 Multi-functional and adaptive building envelopes can provide step-change improvements in the energy efficiency and economic value of new and refurbished buildings, while improving the wellbeing of building occupants. They therefore represent a significant and viable contribution to meeting the EU 2020 targets. There is a critical mass of European knowledge, expertise, resources, and skills in the fields relevant to adaptive facades, but the research efforts across the multi-disciplinary topics and the wide range of novel technologies are scattered across several R D centres in Europe. This Action  aims to harness this knowledge and will thereby generate new ideas and concepts at a fundamental and product/system development level. This will be achieved by creating a research network with a strong multidisciplinary approach, involving academics, industrial partners from the faade supply chain, and other stakeholders. The COST Action  will facilitate the sharing of experimental data, the development of modelling and simulation techniques, and the sharing of common evaluation methods. The work of this COST action is expected to from the basis for exploiting recent technological developments in adaptive faades and energy efficient buildings, and will help to train the future generation of faade R D professionals in Europe.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1403    

 Cement-based materials (CBM)  are the foremost construction materials worldwide. Therefore, there are widely accepted standards for their structural applications. However, for service life designs, current approaches largely depend on CBM strength class and restrictions on CBM constituents. Consequently, the service life behaviour of CBM structures is still analysed with insufficiently rigorous approaches that are based on outdated scientific knowledge, particularly regarding the cumulative behaviour since early ages. This results in partial client satisfaction at the completion stage, increased maintenance/repair costs from early ages, and reduced service life of structures, with consequential economic/sustainability impacts. Despite significant research advances that have been achieved in the last decade in testing and simulation of CBM and thereby predicting their service life performance, there have been no generalized European-funded Actions  to assure their incorporation in standards available to designers/contractors. Therefore, the main purpose of this Action  is to bring together relevant stakeholders (experimental and numerical researchers, standardization offices, manufacturers, designers, contractors, owners and authorities) in order to accelerate knowledge transfer in the form of new guidelines/recommendations, introduce new products and technologies to the market, and promote international and inter-speciality exchange of new information, creating avenues for new developments.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1404    

 The increased need for renewable energy sources has led to expansion of shallow geothermal applications for heating and/or cooling of buildings. The integration of heat exchangers in those elements of the structure that interface with the ground, such as foundations, tunnels and diaphragm walls, is particularly attractive because of the inherent cost saving involved in combining a required structural component with the harvesting of geothermal energy. Thermoactive geostructures present the additional benefit of relying on localized resources (the ground) and therefore do not need additional infrastructural investments. By providing an alternative to fossil fuels and reducing peak demand from the grid, they also provide an attractive tool towards energy independence and distributed generation with no adverse impact on the environment. However, the widespread application of this sustainable technology is currently hindered by the large heterogeneity in the development and regulatory framework in European countries. By sharing knowledge and experiences, the use of thermoactive geostructures will increase, especially in countries with less experience. This newly created network will ensure an inclusive and open platform for scientific discussion to define European best practice rules for geothermal applications, promote public awareness and confidence in this technique, and foster advancement in knowledge through collaboration.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1405    

 During the implementation of asset management strategies, maintenance actions are required in order to keep assets at a desired performance level. In case of roadway bridges, specific performance indicators are established for their components. These indicators can be qualitative or quantitative based, and they can be obtained during principal inspections, through a visual examination, a non-destructive test or a temporary or permanent monitoring system. Then, obtained indicators are compared with performance goals, in order to evaluate if the quality control plan is accomplished. It is verified that there is a large disparity in Europe regarding the way these indicators are quantified and how such goals are specified. Therefore, this Action  aims to bring together, for the first time, both research and practicing community in order to accelerate the establishment of a European guideline in this subject. It will be also analysed new indicators related to sustainable and economic performance of roadway bridges.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1406    

 Enhancing traffic safety is an on-going quest. Traffic accidents cause human suffering and huge economic losses. In the period 2000-2012, the riders killed per 10,000 Powered Two Wheelers (PTW) registered has more than halved, passing from 2.68 to 1.32. Nevertheless, PTW riders are still among the most vulnerable road users and other efforts are necessary toward a vision zero (accident) concept. On the other end, the use of PTW is currently increasing worldwide, especially in urban environments, since PTW offer many benefits for personal mobility: less congestion, time gain, energy savings, easier parking. These beneficial opportunities can only be capitalised if PTW safety is further prioritised. As prior initiatives to improve PTW safety have concentrated on single aspects, a truly holistic and integrated approach towards PTW safety is still lacking. This COST Action  addresses this gap, by bringing together PTW safety experts to i) acquire, unify and coordinate PTW safety research, and ii) ensure broad dissemination towards PTW users, industry and public authorities.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1407    

 The air transport sector is a major contributor to the globalization of the economy. Its growth was accompanied and to a certain extent caused by liberalization. The growth in traffic levels has led to congestion, at both major airports and in airspace, and to a lack of service on thin routes, thus mainly affecting core regions and remote regions. This Action  investigates the relationship between air transport and regional development. The benefits that may be derived from it are both scientific and societal in nature. They include a better understanding of that relationship focusing on Europe; policy recommendations on how air transport infrastructure and service improvements should be made in order to support economic competitiveness and social cohesion; and the constitution of a network of researchers dedicated to air transport and its economic, social and environmental implications aligned with Europe 2020 strategy.       Transport and Urban Development COST Action TU1408   
