QTL mapping of virulence and other quantitative traits in the model plant pathogenic fungus Mycosphaerella graminicola We will combine QTL mapping with the genome sequence of M. grami- nicola to identify candidate genes that underlie important quantitative traits in this pathogen, including virulence, fungicide resistance, and temperature adaptation. Summary of the research plan: Most of the observed differences in phenotype between individuals of the same species are quantitative, with population variation for any phenotype approximating a normal distribution. SGenetic ¸ architectureT refers to the underlying genetic basis for phenotypic traits. Elucidating the genetic architecture of quantitative traits has been one of the most difficult problems in genetics because the complex inheritance of quantitative characters can include additive, dominance, epistatic and environmental components. Significant progress has been made in this area over the last decade by combining QTL mapping based on high-density linkage maps with genome sequence data that has emerged from genome projects. During the last five years we conducted numerous experiments with the pathogenic fungus Mycosphaerella graminicola to establish the connections between genetic diversity and phenotypic diversity. This laid the groundwork needed to identify the actual genes underlying important quantitative traits. In this project, we propose to combine QTL mapping with the first completely sequenced genome of a filamentous fungus to identify candidate genes that underlie important quantitative traits in this pathogen, including virulence, fungicide resistance, and thermal adaptation. Because this haploid fungus does not exhibit genetic dominance, has a small genome and a high gene density with little repetitive DNA, recombines regularly, and expresses well-defined phenotypes with a high heritability that are relatively easy to measure, we are optimistic that we will be able to identify candidate genes, and possibly candidate quantitative trait nucleotides (QTNs) underlying major QTLs within the context of a single project lasting only 3 years. Much of the preparatory work needed for success has already been completed, including resequencing of additional M. graminicola strains, identification of suitable Swiss parents for crosses, identification and validation of SNP loci for both genome scans and high-density localization of candidate genes, and development of assays for quantitative traits. With these tools in hand, we are in an excellent position to make rapid progress in unraveling the genetic architecture of a series of important quantitative traits in a significant plant pathogen. Keywords: QTL mapping, quantitative character, genetic architecture, quantitative trait nucleotide, QTN, Septoria tritici, Mycosphaerella graminicola
