Sustainable intensification of cocoa agroforestry systems This project explores the benefits of agroforestry for sustainable cocoa production by investigating the effects of shade trees on soil properties. We investigate the effects of individual trees with a focus on their tree traits and quantify effects of increases in tree cover at the system scale. Description the principle ingredient in chocolate U comes from the cacao tree (Theobroma cacao Cocoa U L.), which is grown in high biodiversity areas of the lowland tropics (Clough et al. 2009). Cocoa is an important cash crop and the primary source of income of millions of smallholder farmers in the lowland tropics (Clay 2004). While the demand for cocoa in chocolate manufacturing countries is growing (Schroth and Harvey 2007), cocoa producing regions suffer from dwindling yields and decreases in quality (Franzen and Borgerhoff Mulder 2007). This reduces smallholder opportunities to maximize their revenues and threatens the sustainable sourcing of cocoa for the chocolate industry. In West Africa, where more than half of the worldSs cocoa is produced cocoa yields only reach 20 to 30% of their potential (Franzen and Borgerhoff Mulder 2007). Reasons for low quantity and quality include numerous abiotic and biotic constraints (drought, degraded or unproductive soils, aging trees, pests and diseases) in a context where land resources are increasingly limiting, access to input and output markets are poor, and farmers are often unfamiliar with modern farming techniques (Clay 2004, Franzen and Borgerhoff Mulder 2007). Efforts by farmers to intensify production often include the reduction of shade tree cover in cocoa agroforestry systems (Bisseleua et al. 2013). While this provides farmers with short-term positive effects on yields, the removal of trees may lead to negative long term effects on crop production, resilience to climate change, and ecosystem service delivery (Wood and Lass 2001, Bos et al. 2007, Steffan-Dewenter et al. 2007, Clough et al. 2009, Tscharntke et al. 2011). Aware of the risk of a future cocoa shortage, the cocoa industry has been increasingly promoting the cultivation of cocoa in agroforestry systems, which have the potential to improve ecosystem processes and functioning, and achieve long-term production, but might come at the expense of lower short-term yields (Clough et al. 2009, Tscharntke et al. 2011). However, there is likely to be some compromise between intensification efforts and the inclusion of trees that allows for numerous advantages due to beneficial roles of trees (i.e. soil ´ aggregation, carbon sequestration, nutrient and water Ssafety-netS function) and optimizes production in both the short- and long-term. Currently, we have little understanding about where such ideal tradeoffs are located along an intensification gradient. Further, not all agroforests are the same as the specific tree species used as shade trees might differ in their functional traits (e.g. rooting depth, N-fixation, deciduousness, canopy height above the cocoa trees etc.) and hence their effect on ecosystem processes. For example: deeper rooting ´ trees can have an increased Ssafety netS function for water and nutrients as they are able to access deeper soil layers than shallow rooting trees and do not directly compete with the cocoa plants (Lehmann 2003, Buresh et al. 2004, Moser et al. 2010, Schwendenmann et al. 2010). N-fixing legumes in agroforests bring N to the ecosystem and may hence enrich understory soil nitrogen (Rice and Greenberg 2000, Blaser et al. 2013). The extent to which the beneficial effects of trees are expressed in a particular agroforest will hence depend on the traits of the trees in the agroforest. The goal of our project is to investigate existing cocoa agroforestry systems by capitalizing on different treeSs plant traits and shade tree cover to improve the sustainability and resilience of cocoa agroforestry systems (i.e. long-term consistent production and healthy soils). In more detail we aimed to: Quantify the effects of specific tree traits (i.e. rooting depth, N-fixation and fruit production) on c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> ecosystem functioning with respect to water and nutrient use efficiency in cocoa agroforests. Assess the effect of inclusion of trees on soil fertility, carbon sequestration and soil stabilization in agroforests along gradients of shade tree cover (intensification gradient). Identify win-win situations between intensification efforts and the inclusion of trees that allows long-term consistent production and maintenance of healthy soils while achieving optimal yields. Materials and methods In order to assess the effects of trees and trees with specific tree traits on ecosystem functioning at tree scale (objective 1), we selected 33 single standing tree species falling into different tree trait categories. Isolated trees selected for our study were all located within 1km of each other on farm belonging to farmers from Gogoikrom, in the Atwma district, Ashanti region Ghana. The tree species selected represent trees commonly found in cocoa farms in the Ashanti region and include the eight species recommended for the use in cocoa farms by the cocoa research institute of Ghana (CRIG). Species were not replicated, as we were mainly interested in the general effect of trees and specific tree traits and not the effect of a single species. We classified the selected species into shallow and deep rooting species as well as deciduous and evergreen species using information from the Internet, tree literature and personal comments from farmers and a local forester from the KNUST University in Kumasi. Species were further classified into tall (canopy elevated >15m above cocoa canopies), medium (elevated between 5-15 m above cocoa) and low canopy species (not elevated above cocoa canopies) by measuring the elevation of their lowest foliage relative to the upper canopy of the cocoa trees, which reaches between 4-6 m. We determined whether the various woody species were nitrogen fixers, using Sprent (2009) as the main source of information. Unfortunately the study area did not allow us to have an evenly balanced distribution of trees for all trait combinations as simply not all combinations could be found in the cocoa farms of the Atwima region. Around each single standing focal tree we laid out two transects away from the tree trunk of each tree. Along each transect soil were collected at three depths (0-15,15-30 and 30-50cm) in the subcanopy of focal trees at half the distance of the crown radius, at the canopy edge and outside the canopy area at a distance of twice the crown radius or a minimal distance of 10m from the canopy edge if the canopy radius was less than 5m. Top soil samples (0-15 cm) were sampled with a hammer corer whereas subsoil samples (15-30 cm, 30-50 cm) were collected using a soil auger. The samples were combined to one composite sample per position and soil layer, leading to nine samples per tree. Samples were analyzed for total C and N contents using a dry combustion analyzer (CN-2000; LECO Corp., St Joseph, MN). Total P contents were determined colometrically after Kjeldahl digestion using a continuous flow injection analyzer (AutoAnalyzer 3HR; Seal Analytical, Hampshire, U.K.). The lab of the Soil Research Institute of Ghana determined Bray I available P, extractable cations, CEC and soil texture for us. Top soils samples of each plot were broken through a 8mm sieve, air dried and a subsample of 80g was subsequently fractionated by means of wet sieving to determine the aggregation status of soils as described by Six et al. 2000. The mean weight diameter (MWD) of each plot was calculated as: MWD = (2*LM)+(1.125*sM)+(0.1515*m)+(0.0265*(s+c)), with LM representing the percentage of large macro aggregates, sM the percentage of small macroaggregates, m the percentage of micro aggregates and s+c the percentage of silt and clay in each sample. In addition to soil sampling we measured the diameter at breast height (DBH) of cocoa plants in c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> both the sub canopy and in the open areas and collected young, but fully expanded cocoa leaves of the same cocoa plants. Leaves were later on analyzed for their nutritional content as described for total C,N and P in soils. To understand the consequences of shade tree removal for ecosystem functioning (objective 2), we selected 26 plots (30OE30m2) along a gradient from none to high canopy cover values (0-91%). All plots were situated in existing farmers fields located in three nearby villages (Gogoikrom, Akonky and Katatwoa, 4-5 km apart from each other) in the Atwima district, Ashanti region, Ghana. We limited our selection to cocoa fields that contained mature cocoa trees within an age range of 1220 years. To get an impression of a natural reference three additional plots of the same size were located in a primary forest adjacent to Gogoikrom. In order to assess the canopy cover in each plot we spanned fourteen 30 m long ropes at the edges of the plot and at a distance of 5 m to separate the plot into a 5OE5 m2 grid. Within each 5OE5 m2 subsection we assessed the area covered by shade tree canopies from a birds perspective. The percentage canopy cover of the whole plot was then calculated based on the sum of the canopy cover in all subsections expressed as a proportion of the whole 30OE30m2 plot area. Cocoa trees and shade tree densities were estimated by counting individuals in each plot. In each plot along the cover gradient a total of nine soil cores was sampled at a distance of 5, 15 and 25 m from the plot edge along 3 transects located at 5, 15 and 25 m. Topsoil (0-15 cm) were sampled with a hammer corer whereas subsoil samples (15-30 cm, 30-50 cm) were collected using a soil auger. All nine samples of the subsoils were compiled per soil layer and plot. Top soils samples of each plot were broken through a 8mm sieve, air dried and compiled and a subsample of 80 g fractionated by means of wet sieving to determine the aggregation status of soils as described by Six et al. 2000. After drying and grinding all soil samples were analyzed for total C, N and P contents, P availability, extractable cations, CEC as described above. Soil texture was only determined for top soils. To assess the nutritional status of cocoa plants we collected 15 young, but fully expanded cocoa leaves along the three transects and analyzed their N and P contents colorimetrically after Kjeldahl digestion using a continuous flow injection analyzer (AutoAnalyzer 3HR; Seal Analytical, Hampshire, U.K.). On each farm we conducted informal interviews to gather information about cocoa varieties, age of the cocoa stands, fertilization, pest and disease control, labor practices, production area, cocoa and non-cocoa yields and changes in shade cover in the past few years. Farmers were questioned about their perceptions of the impact of shade on cocoa yield and most adequate shade-tree species for cocoa. Statistical analysis: We used two-sided paired t-tests to compare the effects of isolated trees on soil properties relative to open areas. To compare the effect between groups of specific tree traits we calculated normalized tree effects on the different soil properties. To do so we calculated normalized tree-effect ratios (y) of sub canopy (s) to open areas (o) for all soil parameters where y =((s-o))/((s+o)). The normalized effect ratio responds linearly to proportional changes in the two components and has the advantage of reducing differences among sampled species due to potential differences in soils (cf. Dohn et al. 2013). We used separate ANOVA to determine effects of sin´ ´ ´ ge tree traits Scanopy shapeS (high/medium/low), Snitrogen-fixing capacityS (yes/no), Srooting depthS (deep/shallow), deciduousness (yes/no) and fruit production (yes/no) on soil properties. It was not possible to do a complete ANOVA of all traits together because there were too few observations for some tree-trait combinations. Linear regression analyses were used to assess how soil properties change along the canopy cover gradient. All statistical analyses were conducted using R version 2.10.1 (R Foundation for Statistical Computing 2012). c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 4> Equipment used Giddings soil core sampler CN Analyzer Kjeldahl digestion block Continuous flow injection analyzer (AutoAnalyzer 3HR; Seal Analytical, Hampshire, U.K.) Preliminary results (with references to graphics that are uploaded in separate file) The total soil C and N pool were significantly higher under trees (both sub canopy and canopy edge) compared to open areas (Fig 1). Soil aggregation (MWD) was higher under trees compared to open areas (Fig 1). When comparing the aggregate size distribution between sub canopy and open soils we observed that the difference in aggregation is mainly due to more micro aggregates bound in large macro aggregates in sub canopy soils (Fig 2). There was no significant difference between sub canopy and open areas in any other measured soil parameter but canopy edge areas showed elevated total P, extractable K, CEC, Total Extractable Bases (TEB, not shown) and pH but lower extractable P values compared to the other sampled positions (Fig 1). These results show that, in line with our hypothesis, trees do ameliorate soils at the tree level by increasing organic matter and aggregation. The reason why we observe and increase in some parameters at the canopy edge might be because thatSs where most of the rain intercepted by trees will collect and fall and might hence accumulate aerial nutrient depositions washed of from the surface of tree leafs. Increased CEC at the canopy edge would however suggest fundamental differences in soils at the canopy edge, which we did not observe during sampling. Explanations for this result remain to be found. We found no significant differences between the effects of trees on soils when trees were grouped ´ ´ ´ ´ according to the tree traits Scanopy heightS, Srooting depthS, SdeciduousnessS or Sfruit productionS. Distinguishing between N-fixing and non-fixing trees revealed that N-fixing trees reduce total P contents significantly more than non-fixing trees as compared to open sites (p= 0.007, R2= 0.22). This is in line with the fact that N-fixing trees have high P requirements because N-fixation is a P demanding process (cf. Blaser et al. 2013). This result will however need more investigation and a bigger sampling number, as we were only able to locate three N-fixing tree species in our study area. The eight tree species recommended by the Cocoa Research Institute of Ghana (CRIG) showed a trend to a reduced positive effect on soil C and N levels compared to other species (C: p= 0.099, R2= 0.09; N: p= 0.097, R2=0.09) but did not differ from other species regarding other soil parameters. This would indicate that these species do not necessarily show an advantage for the growth of cocoa compared to any other tree species. This result has to be handled with care as we did not replicate the species in our study and are hence not in a position to really point out effects on single species. A more thorough investigation to compare CRIG recommended species to other species would need to be done before clear conclusions can be made. We assume that the lack of differences between tree traits in our data might either be because the unbalanced design of our tree selection prevented the detection of significant differences or that tree traits are not relevant for the soil parameters investigated. A reason for the second possibility might be that some of the traits under investigation (e.g. the canopy height of shade trees above the cocoa canopy or deciduousness) might not show direct effects on soils but still affect cocoa yields substantially due to their potential effects on the microclimate in cocoa farms. Through their regulation of the understory microclimate trees might reduce physiological stress of cocoa as an c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 5> understory tree and hence increase its resilience to climate extremes, such as those predicted to occur with global climate change (Lin et al. 2008, Tscharntke et al. 2011). As we do not yet have the results on yields we are not able to assess this possibility. However, our measurements on cocoa diameter at breast height under and away from trees revealed that the height of the canopy above the cocoa significantly affected DBH (p=0.007, R2= 0.31, Fig 3). Taller trees had a less negative effect than medium and low canopy trees hence reducing the DBH of cocoa trees in their understory less than low canopy trees. This could likely be explained by the effect of lower canopy height on photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) reaching the cocoa plants in the sub canopy of shade trees. Under tall trees with elevated canopies a large proportion of PAR will reach the sub canopy in the morning and afternoon but light is largely intercepted over noon when it might become too hot for cocoa. Under low canopies that are directly above and touching the cocoa trees most PAR will not reach the cocoa trees in the sub canopy independent of the angle of the sun (i.e. time of the day; cf. [15]). Although cocoa pod yield is the focal issue in farm production, cocoa biomass which is related to DHB is often correlated to yields (cf. Isaac et al. 2007) and effects on DBH might hence be a potential indicator for the effects of trees on yields. This result is also in line with the observation that low canopy trees often substantially prevent cocoa growth in their sub canopy, some low, evergreen trees (e.g. Trichilia monadelpha) even completely omit any cocoa from growing in their sub canopy. Potential negative yield effects of trees with low canopies might not be reflected in soil measurements because they do not affect the soils but the microclimate of trees. Further studies on the effects of trees on microclimatic effects and the balance between the importances of soil vs. microclimate are therefore something we plan to incorporate in out future studies. Surprisingly none of the soil variables measured showed a pattern along the shade cover gradient (Fig 4, for C, N and P, other data not shown). The lack of patterns could not be ascribed to differences in soil texture of the different farms. We did however observe substantial variation within plots when we analyzed each of the nine cores separately for 6 out of the 26 investigated farms (data not shown). It might be the high variation in former forest soils and differences in farmerSs practices that obscures the detection of differences between farms with increasing canopy cover. Future projects should therefore put more emphasis on the with plot variation to investigate in more detail why effects observed at the tree level do not translate to the plot level in our study. The comparison with three forest plots showed that even though cocoa soils reached similar aggregation levels, soil C and N levels under cocoa agroforestry do not reach the initial forest levels, even under dense tree cover. P contents in cocoa farms were however found to be the same or even higher than in forest plots (Fig 5). Generally higher aggregated soils contained more C (p<0.001, R2=0.52), N (p=0.001, R2=0.36), and P (p=0.026, R2=0.19) in farmer fields (Fig 5) and under and away from isolated trees (indirectly shown in Fig 1, results from regression analysis not shown). To what extent there are trends in yields along the shade cover gradient is unknown at this stage as the main harvesting season is September to February and the Ghanaian collaborators are currently in the process of harvesting these results. Discussion Individual trees in cocoa systems increased soil aggregation as well as topsoil pools of both C and N in their sub canopy relative to treeless areas. This finding is consistent with general findings about trees in other ecosystems and according to our expectations. Our results hence clearly show that trees are able to change soil properties at the tree level and might hence be beneficial to increase overall soil fertility and sustainability in cocoa farms. In our study the effects observed at the individual tree level do not scale up to plot levels. This c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 6> could be because of high within plot variation and an inadequate sampling number to account for this high variation. Results from a study in Indonesia by a PhD student in our research group at ETH has just shown that 10 samples should be a minimum to account for the high in-plot variability in cocoa fields. Further studies should hence account for this high variability in former forest soils and increase the number of samples per plot. The missing patterns along cover gradients might also be because aspects other than soils parameters might be more important for cocoa yields. It is possible that beneficial effects of trees on mocroclimate through the provision of natural shading and possible mitigation of changes in temperature and precipitation in cocoa fields plays a more important role in cocoa farms than the effects trees have on soil properties (cf. Lin et al. 2008). Data on such microclimate effects in cocoa systems are still scarce. Our results hence show that it is of great importance that future studies take microclimate measurements into consideration and start looking at the relative importance of soil effects vs. microclimate effects of trees in cocoa systems. Our results on the effects of cocoa DBH clearly point in the direction that tree traits might me important for cocoa yields even though we did not observe effects of tree traits on soil parameters. Future studies should hence focus on the effects that trees with different tree traits (canopy height and deciduousness in particular) might have on microclimate properties. Because we did not observe a pattern along the cover gradient and because yield data still needs to be collected we are unable to identify win-win situations where positive effect of trees on ecosystem processes outweigh the negative effects on cocoa yields. Based on our study we can hence not give recommendations on which levels of shade trees would be beneficial to be maintained in cocoa agroforestry systems. Results from Indonesia (cf. Clough et al. 2011) do however show that yields do not drop immediately when tree levels increase. We are still optimistic that such win-win situations might exist but finding them will require more comprehensive studies on the effect of trees on microclimate, soils and yields. Relevant literature Bisseleua, H. B. D., D. Fotio, Yede, A. D. Missoup, and S. Vidal. 2013. Shade Tree Diversity, Cocoa Pest Damage, Yield Compensating Inputs and Farmers' Net Returns in West Africa. Plos One 8. Blaser, W. J., J. Sitters, S. P. Hart, P. J. Edwards, and H. O. Venterink. 2013. Facilitative or competitive effects of woody plants on understorey vegetation depend on N-fixation, canopy shape and rainfall. Journal of Ecology 101:1598-1603. Bos, M. M., I. Steffan-Dewenter, and T. Tscharntke. 2007. Shade tree management affects fruit abortion, insect pests and pathogens of cacao. Agriculture Ecosystems & Environment 120:201-205. Buresh, R. J., E. C. Rowe, S. J. Livesley, G. Cadisch, and P. Mafongoya. 2004. Opportunities for capture of deep soil nutrients. Pages 109U123 in M. van Noordwijk, G. Cadisch, and C. K. Ong, editors. Below-ground interactions in tropical agroecosystems: Concepts and models with multiple plant components. CABI Publishing, Wallingford. Clay, J. W. 2004. World agriculture and the environment : a commodity-by-commodity guide to impacts and practices. . Island Press, Washington. Clough, Y., J. Barkmann, J. Juhrbandt, M. Kessler, T. C. Wanger, A. Anshary, D. Buchori, D. Cicuzza, K. Darras, D. D. Putra, S. Erasmi, R. Pitopang, C. Schmidt, C. H. Schulze, D. Seidel, I. Steffan-Dewenter, K. Stenchly, S. Vidal, M. Weist, A. C. Wielgoss, and T. Tscharntke. 2011. Combining high biodiversity with high yields in tropical agroforests. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 108:8311-8316. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 7> Clough, Y., H. Faust, and T. Tscharntke. 2009. Cacao boom and bust: sustainability of agroforests and opportunities for biodiversity conservation. Conservation Letters 2:197-205. Franzen, M. and M. Borgerhoff Mulder. 2007. Ecological, economic and social perspectives on cocoa production worldwide. Biodiversity and Conservation 16:3835-3849. Isaac, M. E., V. R. Timmer, and S. J. Quashie-Sam. 2007. Shade tree effects in an 8-year-old cocoa agroforestry system: biomass and nutrient diagnosis of Theobroma cacao by vector analysis. Nutrient Cycling in Agroecosystems 78:155-165. Lehmann, J. 2003. Subsoil root activity in tree-based cropping systems. Plant and Soil 255:319331. Lin, B. B., I. Perfecto, and J. Vandermeer. 2008. Synergies between Agricultural Intensification and Climate Change Could Create Surprising Vulnerabilities for Crops. Bioscience 58:847-854. Moser, G., C. Leuschner, D. Hertel, D. Hoelscher, M. Koehler, D. Leitner, B. Michalzik, E. Prihastanti, S. Tjitrosemito, and L. Schwendenmann. 2010. Response of cocoa trees (Theobroma cacao) to a 13-month desiccation period in Sulawesi, Indonesia. Agroforestry Systems 79:171-187. Rice, R. A. and R. Greenberg. 2000. Cacao cultivation and the conservation of biological diversity. Ambio 29:167-173. Schroth, G. and C. A. Harvey. 2007. Biodiversity conservation in cocoa production landscapes: an overview. Biodiversity and Conservation 16:2237-2244. Schwendenmann, L., E. Veldkamp, G. Moser, D. Hoelscher, M. Koehler, Y. Clough, I. Anas, G. Djajakirana, S. Erasmi, D. Hertel, D. Leitner, C. Leuschner, B. Michalzik, P. Propastin, A. Tjoa, T. Tscharntke, and O. van Straaten. 2010. Effects of an experimental drought on the functioning of a cacao agroforestry system, Sulawesi, Indonesia. Global Change Biology 16:1515-1530. Steffan-Dewenter, I., M. Kessler, J. Barkmann, M. M. Bos, D. Buchori, S. Erasmi, H. Faust, G. Gerold, K. Glenk, S. R. Gradstein, E. Guhardja, M. Harteveld, D. Hertel, P. Hoehn, M. Kappas, S. Koehler, C. Leuschner, M. Maertens, R. Marggraf, S. Migge-Kleian, J. Mogea, R. Pitopang, M. Schaefer, S. Schwarze, S. G. Sporn, A. Steingrebe, S. S. Tjitrosoedirdjo, S. Tjitrosoemito, A. Twele, R. Weber, L. Woltmann, M. Zeller, and T. Tscharntke. 2007. Tradeoffs between income, biodiversity, and ecosystem functioning during tropical rainforest conversion and agroforestry intensification. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 104:4973-4978. Tscharntke, T., Y. Clough, S. A. Bhagwat, D. Buchori, H. Faust, D. Hertel, D. Holscher, J. Juhrbandt, M. Kessler, I. Perfecto, C. Scherber, G. Schroth, E. Veldkamp, and T. C. Wanger. 2011. Multifunctional shade-tree management in tropical agroforestry landscapes - a review. Journal of Applied Ecology 48:619-629. Wood, G. A. R. and R. A. Lass. 2001. Cocoa. 4th edition. Blackwell Science, Oxford.
