Fluid-mechanical modelling of vestibular responses to sound The vestibular system of the ear hosts the balance sense whose operation is closely related to the dynamics of two lymphatic fluids contained in the inner ear. We investigate a conditions known as Tullio's phenomenon which leads to a sensory crosstalk, i.e. acoustic stimulations lead to vertigo. The vestibular system of the ear hosts the balance sense. It is located in the cavity of the inner ear, next to the cochlea which is the sensory organ of our hearing. The operation of both sensory systems is closely related to the dynamics of two lymphatic fluids contained in the inner ear. Although the vestibular system and the cochlea share the same fluid spaces, the senses remain mostly unaffected by each other. There exist, however, certain conditions which lead to a sensory crosstalk, e.g. the vestibular system responds to acoustic stimulations. Several forms of such vestibular responses are known. Here, we will investigate a form which is also known as Tullio's phenomenon and which leads to a sensation of angular motion when a sound is heard. Tullio's phenomenon has been connected to a specific anatomical defect which is known as superior canal dehiscence or `third window' of the inner ear. This `third window' is a hole in the walls of the inner ear which connects the vestibular system to the cranial cavity. The sensation of angular motion in Tullio's phenomenon is related to a stimulation of the superior semicircular canal, which is one of the angular velocity sensors of our vestibular system. This stimulation implies that there exists a net fluid flow in the superior canal which excites sensory hair cells. This brings us to the intriguing question of how a purely oscillatory acoustic stimulation can generate a directed flow. In order to be able to understand the mechanisms behind this phenomenon, numerical simulations with fluid-structure interaction will be performed. The results will be compared to the data from clinical experiments which are available in the literature. It is the aim of this project to develop a fluid-mechanical theory for the described vestibular responses to sound.
