Giant Liquid Argon Charge Imaging Experiment (GLACIER) GLACIER (Giant Liquid Argon Charge Imaging ExpeRiment) is a large underground observatory for proton decay search, neutrino astrophysics and CP-violation studies in the lepton sector. Possible underground sites are studied within the FP7 LAGUNA project (Europe) and along the JPARC neutrino beam .... Looking at the future of neutrino long-baseline experiments, T2K and NOvA can be considered as Phase I experiments that will improve the sensitivity to the small mixing angle theta_13 by one order of magnitude over the existing CHOOZ limit, but will have limited sensitivity to the effects of CP violation in the neutrino sector. The next generation of Phase II experiments is expected to have significant discovery potential for CP violation, capability to establish the mass hierarchy and - in case theta_13 is small enough to elude Phase I experiment - extend the theta_13 discovery potential. In order to do so, a Phase II experiment must be designed to have very large statistics, excellent background rejection and very good energy resolution, to measure very precisely the oscillation pattern as a function of neutrino energy. The detector must therefore be very massive (100,000 to 1,000,000 tons of active volume, depending on specific detector technology), and must have the capability to accurately reconstruct neutrino interactions for energies of about 1 GeV. A liquid argon time projection chamber (LAr TPC) provides high efficiency for electron neutrino charged current interactions ("signal" events), with high rejection power against muon neutrinos neutral and charged currents backgrounds in the GeV and multi-GeV region . In particular, excellent separation between electrons and neutral pions comes from fine sampling (few per cent of a radiation length), and a transverse sampling finer than the typical spatial separation of the two gammas from the decay neutral pion. The identification capability for electrons, muons, pions, kaons and protons is also excellent down to energies as low as few tens of MeVs. Embedded in a magnetic field, a LAr TPC gives the possibility to measure both wrong sign muons and wrong sign electrons samples in a neutrino factory beam. Unlike Water Cherenkov detectors, detection and reconstruction efficiencies do not depend on the volume of the detector, therefore a direct comparison between the near and far detector is possible (apart from flux extrapolation). A very large LAr TPC as the one needed in a Phase II long baseline neutrino experiment would also have unprecedented sensitivity to proton decay and neutrinos from astrophysical and terrestrial sources (solar and atmospheric neutrinos, neutrinos from stellar collapse, or neutrinos from Dark Matter annihilation). GLACIER (Giant Liquid Argon Charge Imaging ExpeRiment) is a proposed very large LAr TPC with a well defined conceptual design, and some of its characteristics are outlined in the rest of the paper. The underground localization of the experiment is being investigated along the JPARC neu- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> trino beam in Collaboration with KEK (Japan) and in Europe within the LAGUNA design study. The proposed cryostat for GLACIER is a single module cryo-tank based on industrial liquefied natural gas (LNG) technology. The shape is cylindrical, which gives an excellent surface-to-volume ratio. The detector design is highly scalable, up to a total mass of 100 kton. One key technical challenge is to drift free electrons in liquid argon over a length as large as 20 meters, which requires special care to achieve and maintain high purity in the liquid argon bulk and for the high voltage necessary to generate the drift field (in the order of a MVolt). The readout of the charge relies on the novel Large Electron Multiplier (LEM) technique. In GLACIER there is also the possibility to detect the Cherenkov light produced by relativistic particles in liquid argon, and it is conceivable to have high Tc superconducting solenoid in liquid argon, in order to obtain a magnetized detector. The requirement for the excavation of the underground cavern are particularly favorable when compared to other detector concepts, requiring a cavern of about 250S000 m3 and relatively shallow depth (600 m.w.e. overburden).
