Deformable Interfaces of Multiphase Systems in Extensional Flows: A Numerical Simulation Approach The flow of fluids comprising multiple, immiscible phases attracts attention from a wide range of researchers, both in academia and in industry. These researchers work in fields such as foods, polymers, pharmaceuticals and cosmetics. A common interest resides in the properties and behaviour of the deformable interfaces between the dispersed phase (droplets or bubbles) and the continuous fluid phase. In particular, droplet (or bubble) deformation and break up are important as these have a direct influence on the rheology and structure of the multiphase system. Generally, small droplets manifest in dispersing processes, where large droplets and bubbles are deformed and broken up (dispersed) in flow fields. Empirical findings suggest that a greater efficiency for dispersing processes obtains from elongational rather than shear flows. We explore the influence of surfactants on droplet deformation and breakup. The main focus of our work concerns uniaxial and biaxial extensional flows with particular attention to tip streaming. We also consider mixed shear and elongational flows known to arise in real processing environments. The study is undertaken using a numerical simulation approach: we use a Boundary Integral Method to determine droplet deformation and the conditions leading to break up; and couple to this different surfactant models. Initially we concentrate on simple models with constant interfacial tension and simulate flow fields which arise in the four roll mill and similar apparatus. The results will be compared with our own experimental data, deriving from past and ongoing studies. We move onto more complex models, introducing different equations of state and seeking to capture changing surfactant concentrations and attendant interfacial tension gradients. While it is recognised that interfacial tension gradients play an important part in dispersing processes, scant attention has been paid to these in numerical simulations. We seek to remedy this. We compare our results with our own experimental data on surfactant covered drops. Coordination of our efforts with experimental and engineering projects is mutually informative: our simulations are checked directly; our simulations inform the development of applied dispersing flow geometries, for example, suggesting how these can be optimised with respect to maximum contribution of elongational flows.
