International Relations and Security Network (ISN) The ISN's mission is to promote greater knowledge sharing, learning and collaboration within the international relations and security community. The ISN is a free public service that provides a wide range of high-quality and comprehensive products and resources to encourage the exchange of information among international relations and security professionals worldwide. The ISN works to promote a better understanding of the strategic challenges we face in todaySs changed security environment. Based in Zurich, Switzerland, at the Center for Security Studies (CSS) at the Swiss Federal In drawn from various disciplines, stitute of Technology (ETH Zurich), the ISNSs dedicated team U including the humanities, the social sciences, and information and communication technology U engage in research projects and education activities, provide news stories and in-depth analyses, and develop technologies for information sharing and for creating and supporting e-learning. research instituThe ISN has close relationships with leading international partner institutes U tes, think tanks, and government and non-governmental organizations. The ISN supports its everincreasing partner network by organizing conferences and seminars, bringing together experts and policy-makers, and fostering the electronic exchange of information. By cooperating with its partners, the ISN is able to offer its international audience a vast amount of high-quality content through its website. In fact, the ISN provides more online publications, interactive learning content, annotated links, and events than any other comparable service available free of charge and tailored to the needs of each individual user. U Since it was launched in 1994, the ISN has continually responded to the information needs of it has hundreds of thousands of visitors each month U and has taken advantage of the its users U many opportunities offered by new technologies, while always upholding its autonomy, accountability, and academic integrity. The ISN is jointly funded by the Swiss Federal Department of Defence, Civil Protection and Sport and ETH Zurich. The ISN's mission is to promote greater knowledge sharing, learning and collaboration within the international relations and security community. It achieves this by providing high-quality web- and new media-based information services; education, training and consulting activities; community building, facilitation and networking; and technical support to stakeholders, contractual partners and clients. The ISN focuses on four core products and services: Digital information channels providing integrated information services that facilitate information sharing, interoperability, user-centred design and collaboration; Information management and training programmes in the domain of OSINT, expert search and knowledge management (KM) workshops; e-Learning tools development, content production and consulting services for the DDPS and the international ADL community, as outlined in ToR between Switzerland and the US; and Expert communities, by leveraging its extensive partner network, facilitation and technological knowhow. The communities will offer members a unique possibility to collaborate on joint activities and better interact with one another. This also includes support for third-parties such as the c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> Geneva Centres.
