Advanced Materials Based on Carbon-Rich Acetylenic Architecture One-dimensional acetylenic scaffolding (1D a.s.): molecular wires with diethynylethene and tetraethynylethene repeat units; cyanoethynylethenes: a new class of powerful electron acceptors for molecular scaffolding and opto-electronic applications; 2D a.s.: large perethynylated carbon cores; 3D a.s. In a highly synthesis-driven program, acetylenic advanced materials are prepared and characterized in interdisciplinary collaboration with the objectives: - To expand the limits in size and complexity of stable, monodisperse functional all-carbon scaffolds accessible by organic synthesis and analytical characterization, - to advance in an interplay between experiment and theory the fundamental knowledge of ?electron delocalization in acetylenic molecular architecture extending into one, two, and three dimensions, c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> - to provide new classes of chromophores for potential optoelectronic device applications, - to prepare new molecular allotropes of carbon. Acetylenic scaffolding in the proposed research takes advantage of large libraries of building modules programmed for the generation of desired functions. They include the tetraethynylethenes (TEEs) and the 1,2-diethynylethenes (DEEs) as well as newly developed building blocks including the cyanoethynylethenes (CEEs), 1,1,4,4-tetracyanobutadienes (TCBDs) 1,3-diethynylallenes, diand tetraethynylated butatrienes, azoacetylenes, and triply differentially protected and, hence, chiral triethynylmethanes. Specific functions targeted with the new scaffolds include strong electronic absorptions extending into the near infrared (low HOMO-LUMO gap), high fluorescence quantum yields, facile electron uptake, high nonlinear optical effects, high two-photon absorption (TPA) cross-sections, and photochemical switching between bistable states. In collaboration with the Nanoscale Science Center in Basel, the functions of many of the produced multinanometer-sized objects are visualized by scanning probe and atomic force microscopies (STM and AFM). Examples from our recent work include: Molecular wires. With its linearly conjugated 24 double and 48 triple bonds, a 17.8 nm-long monodisperse 24-mer is the longest linear, fully conjugated molecular wire without aromatic repeat units. Oligomers of the poly(triacetylene)s to which this tetracosamer belongs, have been shown to feature outstanding nonlinear-optical properties. Cyanoethynylethenes. The cyanoethynylethenes (CEEs) are among the most powerful electron acceptors known. Thus 3,8-Bis[(triisopropylsilyl)ethynyl]-2,9-dicyanodeca-2,8-diene-4,6-diynedinitrile undergoes a reversible 1-electron uptake at E0 = U0.57 V in CH2Cl2 (cyclic voltammetry, potential against the ferrocene/ferricinium couple, which rivals tetracyanoethene (E0 = U0.32 V). Upon attachment of additional N,N-dimethylanilino (DMA) donor groups to the residual acetylenic anchor points in the CEEs, chromophores such as 3,8-Bis-2,9-dicyanodeca-2,8-diene-4,6-diynedinitrile with excellent advanced materials properties are obtained. They feature strong intramolecular charge-transfer from the DMA donors to the strongly electron-accepting acetylenic cores, allow thin-film preparation by vapor deposition, and high two-photon absorption cross-sections. The third-order nonlinear optical properties of donor-substituted CEEs and also of the recently introduced 1,1,4,4-tetracyanobutadienes (TCBDs) are exceptional (collaboration with Prof. I Biaggio, Lehigh Univ.) and the construction of optoelectronic devices by vapor phase deposition and thin-film formation will be intensely pursued. In future work, DEEs are introduced into expanded radialenes and radiaannulenes, as well as into new chromophores displaying high second- and third-order optical nonlinearities. Two-dimensional acetylenic all-carbon scaffolds. New expanded dehydroannulenes, expanded radialenes and radiaannulenes are prepared in future work to test the limits of synthetic accessibility and stability of large carbon sheets with multinanometer dimensions. The optoelectronic properties of these shape-persistent chromophores are tuned and their stability greatly enhanced by attachment of lateral N,N-dimethylanilino (DMA) donor groups capable of transferring charges into the strongly electron-accepting acetylenic cores. Recent examples include an expanded radialene with a C60 core whose structure was elucidated by X-ray crystallography and a radiaannulene with an acetylenic C50 core. Radiaannulenes are a new class of macrocyclic chromophores that are hybrids between expanded dehydroannulenes and radialenes. In going work, the radiaannulene scaffolds c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> are expanded to all-carbon cores with more than 100 C-atoms. Three-dimensional acetylenic all-carbon scaffolding. Among the targets are the synthesis of helical foldamers and macrocycles derived from optically active 1,3-diethynylallenes. Thus we recently described the synthesis and separation of alleno-acetylenic macrocycles featuring exceptional molecular symmetries. Molecular recognition in the cavities of such macrocycles is currently under investigation. Another target is the formation of unprecedented all-carbon cages including expanded cubanes expanded radialenes, and a C60 cage and tetrahedranes (Sexpanded ¸ platonic molecular objectsT), with the potential for rearrangement into buckminsterfullerene. Recently we synthesized the first expanded cubane with a C56 core. Formally derived by insertion of buta-1,3-diynediyl moieties single bonds of octamethoxycubane, its synthesis proceeds by the formation of into all 12 CUC corners, then edges, and finally faces as key building blocks and intermediates. In future work, we intend to prepare other series of such unprecedented all-carbon cages to investigate their reactivity, physical properties and the host-guest binding properties of their inner phases. Examples include cubanes and tetrahedranes, prismanes, and a C60 cage with the potential for rearrangement into buckminsterfullerene.
