Design of polymer hydrogels with a gradient in mechanical properties, used as support materials for the cultivation and the differentiation of stem cells We study the effect of different operating parameters, including the composition of the polymerization solution and the reaction conditions, on the mechanical properties (e.g. Young modulus) of hydrogel slabs, and on the subsequent differentiation of stem cells grown on these substrates. Polymer hydrogels have been often used as support materials for the cultivation of different types of cells, including stem cells. Recent findings have indicated that the mechanical compliance of the substrate on which stem cells are attached to is a crucial factor in determining the cell differentiation pathway [1]. A particularly relevant case is the differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells, which can lead to the formation of bone, tendons or muscles, depending among other factors on the mechanical strength of the support material on which they are grown. The aim of this project is to develop, understand, and optimize the preparation of hydrogels made of acrylamide, and cross-linked by bis-acryamide, as supports for the attachment and growth of mesenchymal stem cells. Different polymerization conditions will be investigated, with the objective to find conditions leading to hydrogels with desired final mechanical properties (e.g. Young modulus). By varying monomer, crosslinker, initiator and promoter types and concentrations as well as other reaction parameters, experimental data will be collected in order to develop a mathematical model describing the relation between the reaction parameters and hydrogel properties. The polymer hydrogels will be used as support materials to cultivate and test the differentiation behaviour of mesenchymal stem cells. Once the relationship between reaction parameters and mechanical properties will be clarified, hydrogel supports with gradients in mechanical properties will be prepared. In this manner, one can expect to induce differentiation of stem cells grown on these materials along different pathways, depending on their position on the support, with the objective of obtaining tissues with a smooth transition between hard (bone) and soft (muscles) tissues. A.J. Engler, S. Sen, H. Lee Sweeney and D.E. Discher, Cell, 126, 677-689 (2006)
