Investigation of sub-daily and episodic variations of Earth rotation observed by GPS, VLBI and ring laser gyroscopes The objectives of this project are to determine high-quality Earth rotation parameter (ERP) series with a time resolution of one hour or less derived from various modern space geodetic techniques, namely GNSS, VLBI, and ring laser gyroscopes, and to provide a concise interpretation of the series. Polar displacement associated with earthquakes, the effect of episodic atmospheric disturbances (storms, tornados, cyclones) and of tsunamis are a main focus of the research. After removing all periodic signals for which a refined empirical model will be developed, the investigation of the above-mentioned non-tidal events has a bigger chance of success. This also requests a detailed modeling of atmospheric and oceanic excitation based on geophysical data in the high-frequency range. In the next phase of the project a Kalman ring laser filter will be developed for combining VLBI and GNSS with the Wettzell SG ¸ T observations. For the Wettzell gyroscope the sub-daily signatures of the relative Sagnac frequency should be understood to the sub-milliarcsecond level. Special emphasis will be given to the effects of the tri-axiality of the Earth and its consequences for the rotational behaviour of the Earth. An in-depth study of the Nearly Diurnal Free Wobble (NDFW) characteristics from VLBI-derived hourly polar motion will complete the investigations. The ETH part of the project is devoted to the derivation of an empirical model of subdaily variations in the Earth rotation as observed by the GPS. On the periods of 1 day and shorter the main mass redistribution in the Earth system is caused by the ocean tides, what allows to derive theoretically from an ocean tidal model the amplitudes of the variations in the Earth rotation on the tidal frequencies. The International Earth Rotation Service (IERS) has adopted a model derived in Ray et al. (1994) as an official sub-diurnal model for the Earth rotation parameters (ERPs). We will refer to it as to IERS2003 tidal model. Since space geodetic techniques observe the variations in the Earth rotation caused by all the geophysical excitations together, we can partly interpret the differences in amplitudes between the tidal model IERS2003 and the obtained empirical models as the effects caused by other phenomena c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> than ocean tides, e.g. by libration and radiational atmospheric tides. Other possible reasons for the differences are the uncertanties of the models, both the IERS2003 tidal model and the computed empirical models. We compute the GPS empirical tidal models on the basis of daily free normal equations as a multiyear solution for station coordinates, where all the ERPs were transformed into amplitudes of the tidal terms. To consider the question of reliabily and stability of the GPS-derived empirical tidal models we computed several solutions using 6 years of GPS data each with a shift of 1 year, then for each tidal amplitude RMS values were computed. For comparison purposes we used also two sets of tidal models estimated from the VLBI observations. Fig. 1 shows the RMS values for tidal terms in polar motion (PM) for one GPS solution and two VLBi solutions. Fig. 2 shows the RMS values for the terms in UT1. As can be seen, the GPS solutions show instable behaviour for the terms with the periods very close to 24 and 12 hours. The most affected term in PM is S1 (24.000 hours). This can be attributed to the influence of the GPS orbits. To demonstrate it we computed the time series of the orbital parameters (6 Kepler elements, 9 radiation pressure parameters and stochastic pulses) using back-substitution of the computed multi-year station coordinates and the empirical tidal model into the weekly GPS normal equations (we refer to these time series as orb1). Then we compared these orbital parameters with two other time series obtained in the same way, but where 1 term in the empirical tidal model was shifted by about 100 microsec in both sine and cosine amplitudes: first the shifted term was the unstable S1 term (solution orb_S1), then the shifted term was the stable term O1 (25.819h, solution orb_O1). Fig. 3 shows the differences between the solutions orb1 and orb_S1 (left) and orb1 and orb_O1 (right) for the argument of latitude, fig. 4 shows the differences between the same solutions for the direct radiation pressure term D0. To give an impression about the general quality of the solutions we show in Fig. 5 the aposteriori RMS of unit weight for all 3 solutions (orb1, orb_S1 and orb_O1). As can be seen, the change in the stable term O1 causes the increase in the general noise of the estimated parameters, whereas the change in the unstable term S1 does not make the solution worse in general (aposteriori RMS of unit weight remains the same as in the solution orb1), but leads to a systematic change in the orbital parameters. From this we can conclude that the ampitudes of the variations on some frequencies cannot be reliably estimated from the GPS observations, at least with the used orbit modeling. This instability makes it impossible to compare the affected terms from GPS with the same terms from VLBI. The geophysical interpretaion of the unstable terms is also problematic, e.g. the estimated from GPS S1 term cannot be used for comparisons with the expected influences of the atmospheric tide and non-tidal angular momentum, because this term changes strongly depending on the used timespan and the orbit modeling. References Ray R., Steinberg D., Chao B., Cartwright D., 1994, Diurnal and semidiurnal variations in the Earth's rotation rate induced by oceanic tides , Science 264(5160):830-832. DOI: 10.1126/science.264.5160.830. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3>
