Predictive physical models and large-scale computer simulations to study the role of electrostatics and couplings in the nonequilibrium dynamics of biological membranes in relation to lipid rafts and endocytosis We will develop a multi-phenomenon hybrid particle-continuum computer model to bridge the gap between the scales of individual (electrically or mechanically active) proteins, lipid rafts, and vesicle budding and fission. Such a model allows predictive simulations of protein-containing lipid membanes Membranes in live cells are complex, organized mixtures of different lipids and proteins. They that are believed to be ordered microphases, recontain several functional sub-domains (Srafts ¸ T) sulting from lipid phase segregation. The existence of lipid rafts is, however, still not unanimously accepted. Nevertheless, rafts are suspected to have many important biological functions, e.g., in signal transduction, protein transport and sorting, diffusive transport, endocytosis, and membrane Membrane sub-domains are currently budding, fusion, fission, and tether formation (SBFFT ¸ T). intensively studied using both theoretical and experimental methods. To the best of our knowledge, however, no simulation studies have been carried out so far and the physical mechanisms and dynamics of raft formation and evolution are largely unknown. Currently available membrane models and simulations neglect the dynamic feedback loops between lipids and proteins. Moreover, they neglect electrostatics and hydrodynamics. Most membranebinding proteins, as well as the membranes themselves, are however electrically charged. Electrostatic and hydrodynamic effects are thus expected to play an active role in membrane dynamics. We propose a novel physical model that will, for the first time, fully account for the feedbackloops, electrostatic, and hydrodynamic effects in biomembranes. This holistic model will allow us to study and characterize the dynamics of both the lipid and the protein phases simultaneously and in a fully coupled manner. We will develop a multi-phenomenon hybrid particle-continuum computer model to bridge the gap between the scales of individual (electrically or mechanically active) proteins, lipid rafts, and vesicle budding and fission. Such a model will allow predictive simulations of protein-containing lipid membranes with sub-domain organization, effectively overcoming the limitations of continuum models and molecular dynamics. The proposed model will be able to describe interfacial dynamics, phase segregation, and the global effects of individual electrically or mechanically active proteins. At the same time, it will allow the treatment of time and length scales that are large enough to observe biologically relevant processes such as raft formation and BFFT. Using the new simulation model, we will study the membrane sub-domain (raft) structure and the dynamics of formation of these domains. We expect the long-range effects (electrostatics and hydrodynamics) to have a significant effect on the membrane domain structure as well as on its dynamical and mechanical properties. The knowledge gained in the present project will potentially be of importance in developing novel anti-viral drugs that operate by altering the biophysical properties of membrane rafts. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2>
