Multidisciplinary Structural Analysis and Optimization for Morphing Aerofoils This research program focuses on adaptive structural systems with the goal of applying shape adaptation techniques to an aircraft aerofoil. Overall performance and efficiency is improved and, using embedded actuators, there is the potential of reducing the complexity compared to existing solutions. Summary interdisciplinary The proposed Ph.D. is carried on in the frame of the CHIRP SSmart ¸ AirfoilT project, together with three other doctoral students involved in this effort and taking care of the aerodynamic and control aspects. This research program focuses on adaptive structural systems, which have the potential of reducing the complexity of already existing devices (e.g. by eliminating components such as joints and hinges), permitting a tighter integration with embedded actuators and thus allowing the creation of previously unconceivable devices. The main goal is to apply shape adaptation techniques to an aircraft aerofoil, and investigate the possibility to change the geometry of an airplane wing, thus improving improve aircraft performance with regard to fuel consumption and environmental impact. Yet, the findings will provide scientific fundament for many other applications in different fields. The main challenge of a smart aerofoil lies in the conflicting requirements of deformability and rigidity. In fact, the flight performances of an airplane with easily deformable wings or wing components would be extremely reduced compared to its less deformable counterpart. This is due to the occurrence of dynamic (flutter) and quasi-static aeroelastic instabilities at much lower speeds, and to the inability to withstand the same load factors without aerodynamically unacceptable deformations. Previous research on morphing wings was mostly based on a purely struc-tural approach: mechanical engineers tried to solve this issue by optimising the structural features of the wing (with compliant behaviour only for selected deformation modes) which resulted in severe limitations for both the adaptability of the wing and its capability to sustain high-speed aerodynamic loads. In contrast to the previously cited approaches, in this project the problem will be addressed by considering all the involved disciplines and their mutual interactions. The project is considering a combined theoretical and experimental approach, including the deve for concept and model validation and for lopment of a morphing wing for wind tunnel testing U followed by the design, developmore in-depth analyses of the real potential of the principle U ment and construction of a remote-control demonstrator with a size comparable to common model aircrafts. The purpose of this is to showcase the clear advantage of this solution compared to the conventional rigid wing. This project represents a complementation of on-going research in the field of Smart Structures at the Institute of Mechanical Systems (IMES) and it will open up new perspectives in terms of structural efficiency, multi-functionality and the capability to change shape and geometry of loadcarrying structures in presence of time-varying environmental and operating conditions. Outcomes will provide enabling technologies for applications in sectors that are of strategic importance for the Swiss industry. Research needs The advantages of a morphing wing are numerous and easily identifiable: they are all related to the ability of controlling locally the aerodynamic properties of the aerofoil. Exploiting this feature allows a number of benefits: first, the ability to increase the manoeuvrability of the plane, having c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> a higher number of control variables compared to a plane with conventional moveable surfaces. Secondly, a higher efficiency can be achieved, as the design of the wing must no longer be a compromise between different requirements (e.g. take-off and cruise), but it can ideally be adapted to be optimal for every flight condition. A morphing wing leads also to an overall part reduction and potential weight savings. The analysis of the state of the art shows that many attempts have been done in the past to achieve morphing of load-carrying structures. Still satisfactory solutions for real-world applications have not yet been found due to missing viable concepts, concurrently considering, design, actuation, fluid mechanics and control issues. This research plan is focusing on structural aspects and will cover the following topics. - Design methods In order to face the challenges of a morphing wing, our approach is concurrently considering structural mechanics, aerodynamics and control aspects. The resulting wing will be highly deformable, but it will be dynamically controlled with distributed actuators, and will take advantage of fluid-structure interaction forces in order to avoid dynamic and static instabilities. It is nowadays a common practice to use computer-based analysis and optimisation tools; these however are often neglecting the interplay between the different disci-plines involved (e.g. aero As the investigation of the mutual interaction between various disciplines is dynamics, controlsE). deemed an important research need, a new multidisciplinary analysis environment will be developed. This framework will allow already existing and newly created single-disciplinary programs to interact with each other. - Structural aspects The design of a morphing wing is requiring the investigation of novel approaches for addressing the challenges of compliant wing structures, highly deformable skins as well as the development and integration of appropriate actuators and sensors. Ideas for a compliant wing include wings with a load carrying rigid wing-box in conjunction with flexible nose and trailing edge areas. Adequate support structures, since a deformable skin is going to be used, will be necessary. These will guide the deformation and lead the outer profile to the desired shape. Regarding the compliant skin, we intend to investigate the potential of corrugated sheets, which is a current research topic at the Centre of Structure Technologies. Corrugated panels could be combined with EAP actuators, giving the skin actuation capabilities together with anisotropic stiffness. Objectives and approaches The goal of this research is to evaluate the potential of compliant design for load carrying lightweight structures. This goal is intimately related to the development of adaptive structures capable of withstanding structural loads, while still being able to allow the deformation of the structure to the desired morphed configuration. We intend to realise two working prototypes, in both the form of a wind tunnel testable wing and a model airplane-sized flying demonstrator. The design and integration of the various components will require the development and refinement of procedures and tools considering the tight interac structures, materials, aerodynamics and controls U involved in tion between the different groups U the project. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3>
