Model-based Diesel engine control This project focuses on the application of model-based control to a stateof-the-art heavy-duty Diesel engine. The goal is the reduction of the pollutant emissions, the fuel consumption, and the complexity of the engine control systems. Because of their high fuel efficiency, modern Diesel engines are nowadays used in a wide range of applications. However, they are also responsible for a large amount of harmful emissions, namely particulate matter (PM) and nitrous oxides (NOx). As a consequence, emission legislations are being tightened gradually. State-of-the-art technologies, such as sequential dual-stage turbo charging, common rail injection, exhaust-gas recirculation (EGR) and exhaust-gas after-treatment make it possible to comply with the tightening regulations while maintaining or even improving the fuel efficiency. These technologies add new degrees of freedom to the engine, demanding novel strategies for the development of the engine control. Up to now, the control structures were rather simple, with a strong dependency on measured maps. Due to the many degrees of freedom, this approach is not sensible because of the limited performance and the excessive need for measurements. Furthermore, depending on the application and the market, a manufacturer may use several different engine configurations. Therefore, model-based control strategies need to be used to handle the sheer complexity of a modern Diesel engine. The project focuses on the following subtasks: - Air-path control: Control of the cylinder charge using the turbo chargers and the EGR. - Injection control: Control of the pollutant emissions using the fuel injection. - Supervisory control: Realization of an optimal operating strategy using model-based optimization. In a first stage, this project has focused on the control of the cylinder charge. The turbo chargers deliver fresh air which mixes in the intake manifold with the recirculated exhaust gas. This gas mixture is aspirated by the cylinder and used for the combustion of the injected fuel. Both the amount and the composition of the aspirated gas mixture are crucial for the combustion. Together with the fuel injection they are the main influences on the fuel economy and the pollutant emissions, making fast and precise control of these quantities essential. However, controlling the turbo chargers and the EGR in order to supply the desired gas mixture is a complicated task because the system has several disadvantageous properties. For example, the turbo chargers and the EGR have strong influence on each other and their behavior depends strongly on the operating point of the engine. In order to handle these properties, they have to be characterized first. A system analysis is performed for the models of various engines of different size and air-path configuration. This analysis reveals that the problematic system properties have a common source for all considered engine configurations. This knowledge allows us to design a control structure, which can handle these properties for various engine configurations. This research lead to Publications 1 and 2. In a second stage, the project focused on the control of the injection. The cylinder charge constitutes the boundary condition for the combustion. However, the air-path controller is not perfect and especially during transients, the cylinder charge can differ from the optimal value. Whenever such an offset occurs, the fuel injection needs to be adapted in order to prevent temporary peaks in the pollutant emissions. A model-based estimation of the cylinder charge is used to calculate the necessary adaptation of the injection parameters, such that emission peaks are prevented. This c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> research lead to Publication 3. In the last stage, the project focuses on supervisory control of the engine. For a given driving cycle, legislation prescribes an upper limit for the total amount of pollutant emissions. Generally, there is a trade-off between the fuel consumption and the pollutant emissions. This trade-off renders a simultaneous reduction of the fuel consumption and the pollutant emissions difficult. An operating strategy is sought, which minimizes the fuel consumption while keeping the pollutant emissions on the allowed level. The challenge is to know when it is best to save pollutant emissions at the cost of increased fuel consumption, and when to accept increased pollutant emissions in order to achieve lower fuel consumption. The supervisory controller uses an engine model to carry out an online optimization to solve this problem. This research is still ongoing.
