Turbulence and particles in environmental fluid mechanics The aim of our research is to study feedback mechanisms between fluid flow and transported particles for the case where particles are active, i.e. they react back to the flow due to inertia or motility. The Environmental Fluid Mechanics group is a newly established group at the Institute of Environmental Engineering funded by the SNF focusing on hydromechanics, environmental transport processes and flow-organism interactions. Fluid flows in our environment are characterized by the ability to promote mixing and dispersion of species and particles, such as sediment grains or organic matter, which is of major significance for pollution dispersion in the atmosphere, sediment transport in rivers, formation of biofilms, and plankton dynamics. The aim of our research is to study feedback mechanisms between fluid flow and transported particles for the case where particles are active, i.e. they react back to the flow due to inertia or motility. Up to now our understanding of such mechanisms is limited mainly because the interaction between fluid flow and active particles has received little attention and appropriate measurements are challenging to obtain. The expectation is that a better understanding of such feedback processes will significantly advance our understanding of environmental flows and important ecological processes occurring in aquatic ecosystems. Many aspects of fluid flow and associated transport of particles have been studied extensively in the literature, but only recently have the technical and conceptual tools matured to a level that enables addressing fluid-particle interactions at a suitable range of spatial and temporal scales. In particular, experiments and numerical simulations that rely on the Lagrangian approach, i.e. based on a moving frame reference system that follows the motion of particles and interfaces, are available today at sufficient temporal and spatial resolutions. They allow studying key environmental problems such as turbulent folding of fluid interfaces in contaminant dispersion, re-suspension and deposition of sediment particles, collective motion of planktonic organisms, coupling between hydrodynamics and biofilm growth, in a most direct way. The multidisciplinary profile of this research will favour and consolidate international and national scientific collaborations, with anticipated results meeting both basic and practical research questions. From a practical viewpoint it will potentially help local decision makers for the planning of dam operations, river management, restoration works and the design of biological reactors.
