Modelling City Systems: A Platform-based Approach for Climate-aware Integrated City Planning and Management Climate-KIC and especially the Sustainable Cities System challenge platform (SCS) within Climate-KIC (CKIC) provide already an environment for innovating and deploying next-generation solutions for sustainable urban futures. Right decisions with little information City planners today are challenged by progressing climate-change, missing urban resources, demographic and economical pressures. The transition to becoming a 2kW- and 1t CO2 society comes with large uncertainties. Among the impending urban challenges the most challenging might be: can we arrive at integrated and systemic approaches for urban planning and management? Can we arrive at a cross-disciplinary dialogue for climate-aware and resource-efficient planning and management of cities? Can we co-create an economically vital innovation community that provide simplified access to novel solutions for climate- and resource-friendly cities on multiple scales of business? Can we bring complex system interdependencies together as that we can allow Slittle ¸ informationT for smart decision-making and still use limited information and yet arrive at smart decision-making? Climate-KIC and especially the Sustainable Cities System challenge platform (SCS) within ClimateKIC (CKIC) provide already an environment for innovating and deploying next-generation solutions for sustainable urban futures. With this present proposal SCS proposes a program of activities, which aims to integrate CKIC best practises, running and future CKIC projects into a modular ICT platform for city systems. The Modelling City Systems programme will be co-created by internationally renowned academic and leading business partners of Climate-KIC. The programme will develop and deliver a suite of analysis, design, and operational execution solutions to support the modelling, development and implementation of sustainable cities and districts across Europe and more widely. It is intended to be an on-going programme for the Climate-KIC and partners, and build upon many other Climate-KIC programmes and projects arriving at integrated and comprehensive solutions for sustainable urban futures.
