Characterization and in vitro modeling of obese child gut microbiota The control of body weight depends on mechanisms subtly controlled over time, and the human microbiota may contribute to energy balance. This project aims to develop a new in vitro continuous colonic fermentation model with immobilized obese child fecal microbiota to study microbial and diet factors The human colon contains a wide range of bacterial communities playing an important role in health and disease through its involvement in nutrition, pathogenesis and immunology. Recently, it has been demonstrated that the modulation of gut microbiota affects the metabolism of the host, and may have an impact on energy metabolism. The control of body weight depends on mechanisms subtly controlled over time, and imbalances in the human microbiota of adult obese people may contribute to their positive energy balance. Indeed, obesity alters gut microbiota and several mechanisms are now proposed to link events occurring in the colon and the regulation of energy metabolism. Despite the increasing prevalence of childhood obesity in the Western countries, the composition and metabolic activities of obese children microbiota have not been investigated. Moreover, the impact of dietary changes on gut microbiota has not been extensively studied in obese subjects and there are no studies in obese children. Ethical and accessibility problems limit in vivo studies of gut microbiota, particularly in infants and children. The development of alternative in vitro approaches and devices to simulate conditions in the large intestine would be extremely valuable to understand the mechanisms of the gut microbiota in relation to obesity. Generals objectives of this project are three fold: 1. To characterize and compare the composition and metabolic activities of gut microbiota in obese and normal weight children; 2. To develop a new in vitro continuous colonic fermentation model with immobilized obese child fecal microbiota to study microbial and diet obesity factors; 3. To investigate diet modulations in the new colonic in vitro model. Our experimental approach will be done in three steps: (1) Obese child gut microbiota composition will be investigated using both cultural and culture independent methods. FISH analysis associated with flow cytometry will be used to enumerate the main taxonomic group composing the gut microbiota. Selected functional groups of microorganisms belonging to the potentially imbalanced fibrolytic and hydrogenotrophic communities will be also enumerated using cultural methods. (2) An in vitro continuous colonic fermentation model with immobilized obese child fecal microbiota will be developed to reproduce and investigate gut fermentation in obese subjects. (3) This new colonic model with well chosen stabilization conditions (eg. medium, pH and retention time) will be used to investigate the impact of diet modulation (clinical diets and/or functional foods) on composition and metabolic activities of obese child gut microbiota. The project will provide important new findings on composition of obese child gut microbiota c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> and develop a new in vitro continuous colonic fermentation model of obese gut microbiota. This model will be a major tool to investigate the impacts of diet on obese microbiota.
