Na+-translocating F1Fo ATPase of Propionigenium modestum ATP, the universal carrier of cell energy, is manufactured from ADP and phosphate by the enzyme ATP synthase (or F1Fo ATPase) using the free energy of an electrochemical gradient of protons or sodium ions. The F1Fo ATPases comprise a huge family of enzymes with members found in the bacterial cytoplasmic membrane, the inner membrane of mitochondria and the thylakoid membrane of chloroplasts. While most members of this family use H+ as the exclusive coupling ion, the P. modestum enzyme is the prototype of a few ATP synthases that use Na+ as the physiological coupling ion and switch to Li+ or H+ under certain conditions. Since only a few amino acids in the a and c subunits determine the coupling ion specificity, the overall mechanism of the H+ or Na+-translocating F1Fo ATPases is the same. We have chosen the Na+ F1Fo ATPase as study object because investigations on the ion translocation mechanism with Na+ as coupling ion provide unique experimental options. The ATP synthase has a bipartite structure, consisting of the catalytic headpiece, F1, where ATP synthesis or hydrolysis takes place, and the membrane-bound Fo moiety, comprising the ion translocation machinery. The headpiece is built as a cylinder of three alpha and three beta subunits in a alternating fashion, surrounding the central gamma subunit which is connected to the epsilon subunit and the ring of 9-12 c subunits, embedded within the membrane. The c subunit ring abuts laterally to the integral membrane-bound a subunit and the a subunit is connected via the two b and the delta subunit with the F1 headpiece. The ATP synthase is a miniature engine with rotational mechanics, in which subunits c12 gamma epsilon constitute the rotor and subunits alpha3beta3 ab2delta constitute the stator. Focus of our work is on the operation of the Fo motor. We proposed that the sodium ion translocation proceeds during ATP synthesis from the periplasm via an a subunit channel onto a c subunit binding site and from there to the cytoplasm after the rotor has turned. A model has been developed that describes how this ion movement following the electrochemical gradient is converted into rotational torque. Future perspectives are to gain structural information on the Fo assembly. This will rationalize experimental design to prove or disprove the proposed mechanism and to get in depth knowledge how the molecular Fo motor works. Publications: Kaim, G. & Dimroth, P. (1999) ATP synthesis by F-type ATP synthase is obligatorily dependent on the transmembrane voltage. EMBO J. 18, 4118-4127. Dimroth, P., Wang, H., Grabe, M. & Oster, G. (1999) Energy transduction in the sodium F-ATPase of Propionigenium modestum. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96, 4924-4929. Matthey, U., Kaim, G., Braun, D., Wüthrich, K. & Dimroth, P. (1999) NMR studies of subunit c of the ATP synthase from Propionigenium modestum in dodecylsulfate micells. Eur. J. Biochem. 261, 459-467. Kaim, G. & Dimroth, P. (1998) Voltage-generated torque drives the motor of the ATP synthase. EMBO J. 17, 5887-5895. Kaim, G., Matthey, U. & Dimroth, P. (1998) Mode of interaction of the single a subunit with the multimeric c subunits during the translocation of the coupling ions by F1Fo ATPases. EMBO J. 17, 688-695. Dimroth, P., Kaim, G. & Matthey, U. (2000) Crucial role of the membrane potential for ATP synthesis by F1F0 ATP synthases. J. Exp. Biol. 203, 51-59. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2>
