Atmospheric Model Intercomparison Project (AMIP) diagnostics project No. 32: surface and atmospheric radiative fluxes Within the climate system the surface of the Earth is the place where the most active energy exchange takes place. The geo-graphic distribution of the surface radiative fluxes controls to a large extent the distribution of surface temperature and the intensity of the hydrological cycle and atmospheric circulation systems. It is therefore essential that General Circulation Mod-els (GCMs) attempting to simulate present, past and future cli-mates be able to reproduce the surface energy fluxes accurately. A number of studies have noted large uncertainties in the simu-lation of surface radiation budgets within GCMs. Not so many studies have attempted to compare the GCM-simulated surface ra-diative fluxes directly with observations. The difficult access to the observations of sometimes dubious quality have long pre-vented the surface radiative fluxes from becoming a standard quantity in the validation process of GCMs. The availability and quality of surface radiation observations has recently been improved with the development of two databases at ETH, which offer now comprehensive datasets of fully quality checked surface radiation data: The Global Energy Balance Ar-chive and the database of the Baseline Surface Radiation Net-work. GEBA is a database for the worldwide instrumentally-measured energy fluxes at the Earth's surface with currently 250,000 monthly mean data entries for about 1600 sites. This dataset allows an assessment of the calculated flux climatolo-gies on a monthly mean basis at a large number of sites. The da-tabase of the Baseline Surface Radiation Network BSRN includes only a selected number of sites, but with observations of the highest possible accuracy at high temporal resolution (minute values). The most extensive use of GEBA for GCM validation was made in the studies of Wild et al . (1995a, 1995b, 1997, 1998a) with fo-cus on the ECHAM GCMs. The investigations showed an overestima-tion of the GCM-calculated insolation at the surface, due to a lack of shortwave absorption in the atmosphere. Indications for a lack of shortwave absorption were not just found in the all-sky atmosphere, but also in the cloud-free GCM atmospheres. In the longwave, on the other hand, evidence for an underestimated downward flux at the surface was found. The methodology used by the applicants for the validation of the ECHAM GCM has been adopted to three other European GCMs and the ECMWF re-analysis in the framework of the EU project HIRETYCS (High Resolution Ten Year Climate Simulation), which included the intercomparison and validation of AMIP simulations performed with high resolution versions of the European GCMs. After the expertise gained with a small number of GCMs in the above project, we extend our investigations to include state-of-the art versions of all major modeling groups. This allows for an over-view over the ability of the latest generation of GCMs to simulate the radiative fluxes both in the cloudy and cloud-free atmosphere. The principal aims of this project are: 1) to assess the ability of the GCMs participating in AMIP II to simulate the mean monthly incident shortwave and longwave radia-tion at the surface compared to more than 750 observation sites as available from the most recent states of the GEBA and BSRN databases. 2) to evaluate monthly mean GCM-calculated climatologies of clear-sky shortwave and longwave surface fluxes at selected sites with measurements of high quality and high temporal reso-lution as c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> available from the BSRN database. 3) to estimate the mean monthly shortwave atmospheric column ab-sorption by combining the surface climatologies used in 1) and 2) with collocated TOA observations from satellite. This allows an assessment of the all-sky shortwave atmospheric absorption in the GCMs above more than 700 sites from GEBA, and both clear-sky and all-sky atmospheric absorption at the BSRN sites. 4) to assess the model-calculated surface and atmospheric cloud radiative forcing at sites where both clear-sky and all-sky absorption are available (BSRN sites). 5) to compare trends and variability in the GCM simulated sur-face radiative fluxes over the AMIP period with observed statistics in the GEBA and BSRN.
