X-ray Structure-based de novo Design of Nonpeptidic Enzyme Inhibitors: Molecular Recognition Studies with Biological Receptors and New Leads for Medicinal Chemistry Projects that were successfully pursued over the last years: inhibitors of thrombin (key serine protease in the blood coagulation cascade), catechol-O-methyltransferase (cf. Parkinson's disease), t-RNA guanine transglycosylase (cf. bacillary dysentary), and plasmepsin II (malarial aspartic protease) This modern medicinal chemistry program aims at establishing rational lead generation as an intelligent, economic alternative to combinatorial and high-throughput screening approaches. It focuses at expanding the understanding of biological molecular recognition, generating detailed information on the strength of individual bonding interactions and their contribution to the overall free energy of complexation. Such knowledge is widely applicable to other medicinal chemistry projects. The strong performance of our rational, structure-based design approach is illustrated by the following: in the first six projects brought to the stage of biological testing, the first designed compounds showed an inhibitory activity (Ki or IC50) between 1 and 16 micromolar. Within 1-2 X-ray structure-based lead optimization cycles, single-digit nanomolar activities have been reached in all advanced projects. Whereas rational structure-based inhibitor design and synthesis are done in our laboratories, biological testing and protein crystallography are pursued in collaborations. Targets in this research are, among others: - Thrombin, a serine protease in the blood coagulation cascade and target for antithrombotic drugs. A recent study illustrates the molecular recognition aspects of this work. We undertook a fluorine scan within thrombin to map the fluophobicity/fluorphilicity of an enzyme active site (in collabora- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> tion with Roche, Basel). By X-ray crystal structure analysis of a complex between thrombin and a fluorinated inhibitor, we showed that HUC(a) UC=O fragments provide a pronounced fluorophilic environment. Database mining revealed a frequent occurrence of CUF...C=O contacts that are best and C=O units. described in terms of multipolar interactions between the intrinsically polar CUF As the F-atom approaches the carbonyl C-atom, it is preferentially located at or near the pseudo trigonal axis of the carbonyl system. In consideration of the high propensity of HUC(a) UC=O units in the active sites of proteins, such F-interactions could be effectively exploited for enhancing ligand affinity or selectivity in structure based design. This research has in the meantime led to a general exploration of orthogonal multipolar interactions in chemistry and biology (see molecular recognition studies). In particular with thrombin, we are investigating the similarity and differences CUOH, in the interactions of CUF, and CUOMe groups with dipoles in the protein. - Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), an S-adenosylmethionine-dependent enzyme that needs to be blocked in Parkinson therapy to avoid methylation of L-Dopa. Here a bisubstrate-inhibition approach led to compound 2 with an IC50 of 9 nanomolar. The binding conformation of one of our inhibitors in the active site of COMT was revealed by X-ray crystallography (in collaboration with Roche, Basel). Recently, we have been able to substitute for the first time the nitro group of the above inhibitor by suitable hydrophobic residues without substantial loss in activity. Replacement of the nitro group is desirable for both pharmacokinetic and pharmacological reasons. In ongoing work, we investigate suitable replacements for the ribose and adenine moieties in the receptors. - t-RNA guanine transglycosylase (TGT), a target in antibacterial therapy against shigellosis (in collaboration with Prof. G. Klebe, Univ. Marburg). An X-ray crystal structure was obtained of a first-generation inhibitor within the active site of TGT. The central quinazolinone scaffold is nicely sandwiched between a methionine and a tyrosine. The imidazole moiety reaches into a newly discovered shallow lipophilic pocket at the active site that is encompassed by V282, V45, and L68. Ongoing research explores inhibitors with new central scaffolds that are able to better block the second, RNA binding site in the active site of TGT. Factor Xa, another serine protease from the blood coagulation cascade. Here, in collaboration with Roche Basel, we characterized the S4 pocket in the enzyme active site as a powerful cation binding site. It consists of a molecular box lined by side chains of Phe, Tyr, and Trp and binds (CH3)3N+CH2R residues by 2.8 kcal/mol more strongly than (CH3)3CCH2R residues. Quantitative structure-activity relationships are pursued to further characterize the requirements for strong cation-<pi> interactions at enzyme binding sites. The choice of targets is actually increasingly being defined by the needs of the populations of emerging countries. Examples of ongoing projects are the development of inhibitors of the malarial aspartic protease plasmepsin II and of several enzymes in the non-mevalonate pathway in terpene biosynthesis that the malarial parasite plasmodium falciparum uses, enzymes of trypanosomia, the African sleeping disease. Furthermore, one of the main objectives of future work is to learn to develop small nonpeptidic molecules that interfere effectively with protein dimerization and protein aggregation in general. A target in this research is the dimeric HSV (herpes simplex virus) thymidylate kinase. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3>
