Solar and Stellar Dynamos The magnetic activity of the Sun influences the space weather and the Earth's magnetosphere. Our goal is to understand the processes driving the solar and stellar dynamos and be able to predict the solar activity counting on its cyclic nature. Magnetic fields are known to play a fundamental role in stellar evolution. Despite the theoretical significance of magnetic fields, however, relatively little is known empirically because of scarcity of direct measurements. In this project we employ indirect methods for studying stellar magnetic fields. For instance, we are able to recove distribution of cool magnetic spots on the stellar surface with the help of so-called Doppler imaging technique. The Doppler imaging technique is used to extract the information about the surface brightness of the stellar disk which is encoded in time varying spectral line profiles of rotating stars. Cool regions on the stellar surface radiate lower continuum flux, as compared to the hotter photosphere, and so distort the shapes of rotationally broadened profiles of spectral lines. Since the star is rotating sufficiently rapidly that the rotational broadening of the line profile is significantly larger than the local line profile at any single point on the stellar surface, a cool spot on the stellar surface causes a distortion of the profile. The radial velocity at which the distortion is observed is defined by the position of the cool spot, while its size is proportional to the spot's size. As the star rotates, the distortion moves across the profile, with the amplitude depending on the spot latitude. For instance, spots near the stellar equator will produce a distortion that is only visible for half the rotational cycle of the star and that migrates with time from the extreme blue wing of the line profile to the extreme red. Higher latitude spots produce distortions that may be visible at all times and that migrate back and forth near line center as the star rotates. A time series of the temperaturesensitive atomic line profiles observed over a full stellar rotation thus contains information about the spot distribution on the stellar surface. This distribution is inferred using an inversion technique resulting in a map, or image, of the stellar surface. With our surface imaging technique we investigate magnetically active binaries and single stars in order to compare the most important patterns of their activity, such as spot migration, active longitudes, cycles, and correlation with the chromospheric activity. Our results for binary giants and subgiants raise questions if active longitudes and their cyclic behaviour occur solely in such stars and what is the influence of the binarity on the structure of stellar magnetic fields. Nonlinear magnetic dynamo calculations suggest that active longitudes can steadily exist in single stars. Recently we provided first observational confirmation on non-axisymmetrical spot distribution on the surfaces of young solar-type stars and the Sun. Active, very young stars, which just arrived at the Main Sequence (PleiadesS age) are often re Thus, the young Sun has most likely shown the strong activity, such as garded as the Searly ¸ SunT. we now observed it in young solar type stars. It is however unknown if the behaviour of the young Sun differed only by the level of the activity or if it had dissimilar activity, possibly resembling that of other active stars. The answer to this question is of fundamental importance to our understanding of the solar dynamo and its evolution. We plan therefore to study young solar type stars c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> with known age and to learn how the global magnetic field on the stellar surfaces is developing and evolving. Current nonlinear dynamo models for cool rapidly rotating stars produce either oscillating axisymmetric fields or steady non-axisymmetric fields. Our results favour however oscillating nonaxisymmetric fields. This may suggest coexistence and interplay of the two modes, non- and axisymmetric. We investigate the relative contribution of the two modes in different type of stars with magnetic activity, which will constrain the theoretical calculations. In addition, by modelling longterm variations of the stellar brightness (starspot distribution) with simple dynamo modes, we are able to infer possible dynamo mode configurations excited in cool stars and the Sun.
