Impact of organic amendments on the phosphate nutrition of crops and on phosphate transformations in lixisols from semi-arid West Africa Organic matter and phosphate (P) inputs are essential to restore the fertility of the fragile soils in West Africa (lixisols) and to improve crop production. This project will evaluate long, medium and short term effects of organic amendments on crop production, plant nutrition and soil fertility. A vast majority of the population in semi-arid West Africa lives in rural areas from agriculture with less than 2 a day and still suffers from food insecurity. Population increase and climate change will further aggravate the situation. To palliate this situation agricultural productivity needs to be improved and stabilized with practices that can be applied by smallholders. Research conducted in West Africa has shown that organic matter and phosphate (P) inputs are essential to restore the fertility of the fragile soils of the region (lixisols) and to improve crop production. However, there is still a lack of information on how organic amendments affect P availability to crops in these lixisols. This project will evaluate the long, medium and short term effects of organic amendments on crop production, plant P and N nutrition and soil P dynamics. The project will be carried out in Burkina Faso and at the ETH Zurich by Mr. I.D. Kiba, a graduate student from Burkina Faso. This project will continue the cooperation between the Institut de lSEnvironnement et de Recherches Agricoles (INERA) of Burkina Faso, the Tropical Soil Biology and Fertility (TSBF) Institute of CIAT and the Group of Plant Nutrition of the ETH Zurich and start cooperation with the Université Polytechnique de Bobo Dioulasso (UPB) and the Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA). The scientific results of the project will be disseminated within the scientists of INERA, within the AFNet network of TSBF on soil fertility in Africa and in the international scientific community. Results related to the management of organic amendments will be disseminated to farmers in the zone of the project and to farmers in Burkina and other regions of West Africa by the INERA and the AGRA network. Finally, the project will contribute to the institutional development of INERA and of the UPB.
