MODEL: Mechanics Of Deformation of the Earth's Lithosphere We develop new numerical techniques and apply them to study geological processes on both a lithospheric and crustal scale. The deformation of lithospheric plates result in a wide variety of geodynamical processes such as mountain belts, volcanic eruptions, and earthquakes. Since most lithospheric processes occur on a million-year timescale and involve rocks which have a nonlinear rheology, they are difficult to reproduce with laboratory experiments. Moreover, the geological record yields an incomplete picture of such processes and geophysical techniques mainly give a snapshot of how the Earth looks like today. As a result, most geological reconstructions remain interpretations that are not always mechanically consistent. Here, we will employ computer models that are capable of simulating lithospheric deformation under geological conditions, while employing realistic laboratory-derived creep laws of rocks. We propose to: 1) Constrain the present-day rheology and structure of the lithosphere in active mountain belts (European Alps and the Himalaya) by combining forward models with inverse techniques constrained with available geophysical datasets. 2) Develop mechanically consistent reconstructions of mountain belts by using the best-fit rheologies from step 1 as an input for 3D models that are performed on geological timescales, and which are constrained with geological datasets. 3) Obtain insights into the physics of processes related to the deformation of (i) fold and thrustbelts and (ii) salt-related structures in sedimentary basins. The project will significantly advance our understanding of dynamics of the lithosphere and deliver models that satisfy both geophysical and geological constraints. Therefore, the outcome of the proposed work will provide a solid framework for understanding most geological processes that are related to the deformation of the lithosphere and crust. The project is funded by an ERC Starting Grant awarded to Boris Kaus
