GreenRice- nitrous oxide emissions under alternative irrigation management in rice systems xxx Description The large majority of irrigated rice is grown under continuously flooded conditions. Continuously flooded (CF) rice systems generally have higher yields and fewer weed and management issues relative to alternative irrigation management (AIM) strategies which employ multiple drainages (Bouman et al., 2005; Devkota et al., 2013). Flooded rice systems account for more than 10% of global CH4 emissions (Conrad, 2009) due to the high degree of anaerobicity and low soil redox potential. The general paradigm is that water saving practices which decrease the duration of flooding will decease CH4 emissions but increase N2O emissions and decrease yields. Considering the high global warming potential of N2O, 298 times that of CO2, it is essential to evaluate new management practices using a yield-scaled GWP metric (Van Groenigen et al., 2010; Pittelkow et al., 2013). Accurate field based measurement of CH4 and N2O emission is costly and time consuming, therefore there is a pressing need to better understand the underlying sources and microbial processes responsible for nutrient transformations and gas emissions so that these processes can be accurately modeled with biogeochemical models such as DeNitrification-DeComposition (DNDC) (Li et al., 1994). Nitrous oxide is produced through multiple microbial pathways but primarily during aerobic nitrification and anaerobic denitrification (Butterbach-Bahl et al., 2013). The balance between these processes depends on the soil environment and also on the availability of substrates and electron acceptors, therefore multiple parameters are needed for accurate source partitioning and modeling. Work at ETH focuses specifically on source partitioning of N2O emissions (e.g. identification of responsible processes) under AIM and CF using state of the art isotopic techniques. Quantification of natural abundance 15N ratios in N2O, NO3- and NH4+ can reveal the underlying process of N2O production, however careful analysis of associated N transformations is necessary (Baggs, 2008). In addition to natural abundance 15N ratios, recent technologies now enable us to measure the intramolecular distribution of 15N within the N2O molecule, called site preference (SP). The use of site preference to differentiate between N2O sources holds promise but significant methodological hurdles remain in the collection and interpretation of data (Decock and Six, 2013; Lewicka-Szczebak et al., 20
