Emission relevant modeling and control of an automotive TWC The goal of this project is to develop a 1-dimensional dynamic model of a three-way catalyst. This model then will serve as basis for the design and evaluation of new control strategies, which can lower the number of NOx peaks, while avoiding higher CO emissions. Introduction Very strict emission regulations of automotive engines force the use of highly efficient exhaust gas aftertreatment systems. Since alternative technologies have not yet reached the desired emission levels, further development of aftertreatment systems of port-injected engines is indispensable. For port-injected gasoline engines three-way catalysts are today's most successful after treatment concept. Three-way catalysts are capable of oxidising CO and unburnt or only partly oxidised hydrocarbons and at the same time reducing NO to CO2, water and nitrogen. Conversion rates of over 98% are reached if the exhaust gases exiting the engine are kept within a narrow window around stoichiometric conditions. However, during transient operation of the engine, as it is the case during a typical driving cycle, short deviations to the rich or to the lean side cannot be avoided by the lambda control system. These deviations can be absorbed by the three-way catalyst, as long as the catalyst's oxygen storage is neither completely oxidised, nor completely reduced. To prevent a breakdown of the conversion rate during these transient deviations, a control strategy is essential, which takes the catalyst's filling state into account. Current state-of-the-art catalyst controllers, which use a PI-controller to stabilise the voltage of a switch-type lambda sensor downstream of the catalyst, often fail to prevent these conversion breakdown events because of the following difficulties: There is no simple correlation between the sensor signal and the catalyst's filling state. Lambda sensors are not only sensitive to the air-to-fuel ratio, but also to the H2-to-CO ratio, which changes during transients and with the catalyst's aging level. Project Goals A major part of the NOx emissions measured during a driving cycle stem from conversion breakdowns occurring once the catalyst's oxygen storage is filled up. The goal of this project is develop a model of the three-way catalyst, which can accurately predict NOx break through events. Based on this model new feed-forward and feedback control strategies will be evaluated, which are designed to lower the number of NOx breakthroughs, while avoiding a higher level of CO emissions. Experimental Facilities Measurements and experiments are performed on dynamic engine test bench equipped with an Audi V6 2.8L SI engine. Figure 1 shows a photograph of this test bench. The complete engine control system is implemented on a dSpace system, which allows full control over all parameters, controller loops, etc. Apart from synthetic excitations of the desired inputs, emulated driving cycles can be measured as well. For the exhaust gas analysis highly dynamic analysers for the c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> measurement of H2, O2, NO, HC, CO, CO2, H2O and N2 are installed. Since the dynamic behaviour of the catalyst is very complex and the variation of the exhaust gas composition is very limited on an engine test bench, various phenomena can hardly be analysed separately on an engine test bench. Therefore additional measurements to investigate the influence of the different exhaust gas components were performed on a model-gas test bench, where the exhaust gas is mixed from bottles and heated up to the desired temperature. The setup of the model-gas test bench is shown in Figure 2. New flow controllers are being tested to improve the dynamics of this test bench. Current Results Various sets of measurements have been performed on the engine test bench as well as on the model-gas test bench. Based on previews work at our institute an existing model of a three-way catalyst has been extended to improve the accuracy of the NOx conversion. Additionally, a simplified fast solver was implemented, which allows the simulation of the catalyst's performance during a driving cycle in real time and improves the computation time of the parameter estimation process.
