Silicon Microstrip Detector for CMS The central tracking detector of CMS is a complex system of three sub-detectors which comprises two layers of solid state pixel detectors close to the interaction vertex, followed by three layers of Silicon microstrip detectors (SMD) and an array of 7 layers of microstrip gas chambers. The institute contributes to the SMD based on the experience in microstrip detector technology over more than 10 years as well as on the existence of the necessary infrastructure in the institute. Three layers of Silicon microstrip detectors instrument the radial region between 20.5 cm < R < 40 cm. Subdivided into a barrel and forward part the detector provides at least three measuring points on each track in the rapidity range smaller than 2.6. About 2.8 x 10$^{6}$ electronics channels are used to read out 4320 detectors arranged in spirals in the barrel region, and discs in the forward parts. Two basic detector types are foreseen : single-sided and double-sided using small angle stereo strips. Rectangular detectors are used in the barrel, whilst a wedge geometry is needed in the forward region. To avoid dead regions in the tracking volume and allow easier alignment, the detector modules are assembled with a few millimeter overlap both in the R-Phi and Z coordinates. The barrel Silicon detectors provide accurate measurements in the bending plane. Strips oriented along the beam direction are read out with a 0.050 mm pitch in R-Phi. The stereo strips make an angle of 60 mrad with the corresponding electrodes on the p-side of the detector. The readout pitch in this case is 0.200 mm. The total number of readout channels in the barrel is about 1.9 x 10$^{6}$. Double and single-sided detectors have identical p-side designs. Each strip is AC coupled to external amplifiers by integrated capacitors, and polysilicon resistors bias the strip via a guard ring structure. A similar layout is produced on the ohmic side, with the addition of a p+ implant isolating each strip from the neighbouring ones. Prototypes of the single and double-sided detectors satisfying these specifications already exist. After completion of several several single-sided and double-sided modules, first beam tests can be done using the prototype optical link for data transmission. The next step foresees the construction of prototypes of the barrel and disc structure to study solutions for the assembly of the detector modules, the readout and the infra-structure as well as for the implementation of the Silicon system into the CMS tracker system.
