Radio Channel Modeling and Measurement As a result of the ongoing and completed research projects of the group, several contributions dealing with models and measurements of the radio channel (RACE-CODIT, COST 231, COST 259) for 2G to 4G mobile communication systems have been made. Their optimum design strongly depends on the knowledge about the underlying (directional) characteristics of the propagation channel. Measurements of the CIR (complex impulse response) have been started in 1986 at 900 resp. 1980 MHz with a bandwidth of 180 MHz using single monopole antennas. The follow-up project led to the ECHO 24 measuring system featuring 24 GHz, a bandwidth of 500 MHz and a virtual 3D receiving antenna array (see the following project description). A new system at 5 GHz with a bandwidth of 200 MHz is now in use. A switched receiving antenna array with 32 patch elements has been developed (see next project). This system will be extended with a switched array antenna at the transmitter and equipped with a 60 GHz frontend later on. Effects included in current modeling and measurement efforts are path loss, large-scale fading through shadowing, small-scale fading due to multipath interference, joint delay and azimuth spreading, polarization dispersion and dynamic evolution of paths. Additional channel parameters like the mutual correlation between delay and angular multipath components will be important for 3rd generation systems to properly set up the system parameters and to evaluate their performance. UMTS or HIPERLAN will require diversity and/or beam forming techniques to enable a variety of new services. These communication systems will also be the first ones which actively utilize the spatial dimension for interference reduction or capacity increase. The objective of the ongoing research is the specification of a comprehensive channel model based on the physical approach supported by measurements in different frequency bands, radio environments, and utilizing refined measuring equipment. The aspects of radio wave propagation (three-dimensional) at the sending as well as at the receiving antenna and polarization effects will form an integral part.
