Algorithm and Complexity in Information Technology The main objective of the ALCOM-IT project is to develop technologies and methods for the design of efficient algorithms, and to transfer them to the industrial domain. In particular, we plan to: 1. Deliver correct, efficient, and easy-to-use libraries of combinatorial software of general applicability and embodying the best algorithms and data structures; 2. Provide solutions to efficiency-critical algorithmic and optimisation problems arising in particular IT application domains, e.g., management of large computer and communication networks, advanced graphical software engineering environments, logistics, and resource management; 3. Transfer to application developers, in industry and elsewhere, new paradigms, methodologies, tools for algorithm design and analysis and best-practice criteria; 4. Develop new algorithms and new methods for their analysis and design, and improve the understanding of efficient computing. Our objective of providing high-quality software that meets the standards of front-line algorithmic research will be achieved by having fundamental research and software development tightly coupled (in our consortium these two competences can be often united in the same person). We believe that this is a key factor for the success of an ambitious project of this kind, since it ensures that research advances will flow directly into application-driven deliverables, and it will shorten considerably the time lag for technology transfer. We plan intensive industrial collaborations in order to pursue more application-oriented research and to transfer know-how more effectively from the project to users in industry. The main contribution of ETH to ALCOM is in the area of computer algebra and computational Biochemistry. In many applications, such as lexicography and computational biology, there is an urgent need for new techniques and data structures for the retrieval of textual information from huge data bases. We shall address basic problems common to many applications, such as pattern-matching and string-alignment: searching a large set of strings to find all occurrences of substrings that are similar to a given pattern, and determining similarities among strings under a distance measure which may reflect mutations, experimental error or similarities among strings. Several libraries from LUO are being incorporated into the standard Maple distribution, forming a new combinatorial package (CombStruct) of wide applicability. This work is the basis of a cooperation agreement with Waterloo Maple Software GmbH (Heidelberg) and it has also led us to be associated with the advisory group of the Maple system. We shall provide libraries for solving recurrences, reducing differential equations, and performing asymptotic analysis in relation to general tools needed for the automatic analysis of combinatorial models and to the LUO system. The cooperation with Maple is greatly enhanced by the inclusion of the Zürich c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> group in ALCOM-IT, as that group is one of the world leaders in computer algebra and a major originator of the Maple system itself.
