Turbulent mixing of liquid flows Turbulent mixing of liquid flows of different physical properties (density, concentration of dissolved components) are studied experimentally and by means of Computational Fluid Dynamics. Applications are in the fields of coolant mixing in LWRs and thermal fatigue of T-junctions. The mixing of coolant streams of different temperature in pipe junctions leads to temperature fluctuations that may cause thermal fatigue in the pipe wall of the equipment of power plants. Objects of particular interest are T-junctions, where strong fluctuations can be found in the transient flow field downstream. This is an important issue in connection with the long-term operation of nuclear power plants and is part of the research on plant lifetime management. The work was started in 2006, when a T-junction test was installed at PSI (Fig. 1). Experiments were carried out at a perpendicular connection of two pipes of 50 mm inner diameter. The straight and the side branches were supplied by water of different electrical conductivity, which replaced the temperature in the thermal mixing process. A set of three wire-mesh sensors with a grid of 16 x 16 measuring points each was used to record conductivity distributions downstream of the Tjunction. The results were published by Zboray et al. (2009) and Walker et al. (2010). The data (see an example in Fig. 2) was taken as basis for some CFD code performance activities. A discussion of the capability of RANS models to predict the measured transport scalar distributions is given by Walker et al. (2011). Results obtained by LES modeling were compared to the T-junction experiments by Kuhn et al. (2010) and Niceno et al. (2009). The CFD code developer ANSYS-CFX used toe data to validate the RANS and the Scale Adaptive Simulation approach of the commercial code CFX-10 (Frank et al., 2008). A summary of the results was given by Prasser et al. (2008). In some experiments, one of the sensors was placed close to the inlet of the side branch in order to observe back entrainment of liquid from the main branch, which was found to occur at very low flow rates in the side branch. This is a quite important scenario, since the frequency of the temperature fluctuations in the side branch is much lower than in the main branch, which leads to higher amplitudes in the wall. First experimental results were presented by Zboray & Prasser (2011). For a comprehensive study of this phenomenon, a new test facility was constructed (Kickhofel et al., 2012). It allows to vary the geometry of the T-junction in a wide range. Density effects can be simulated, too. The orientation in space of the side branch can be changed, as well as the diameter ratio and the curvature of the edges of the junction. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> A successful attempt to predict the amplitude of temperature fluctuations by means of steady-state RANS was reported by Manera et al. (2009), who used the Temperature Fluctuation Transport Model, which is an extension of the Reynolds Stress Model by transport equations for the turbulent heat fluxes and the enthalpy (scalar) RMS. This model is included in ANSYS-CFX as a beta feature. The results provided the motivation to initiate a dedicated research on this subject (see project 28749, Temperature Fluctuations in Fluid and Pipe Walls induced by Turbulent Mixing ). In T-junction experiments the strong effect of a stable density stratification on the mixing process was observed. In order to study stable and unstable density stratification under the conditions of isokinetic mixing with boundary conditions that are as generic as possible, the experimental test facility GEMIX (GEneric MIxing) was created. It is located at PSI. Two streams of liquid are brought in contact in a horizontal channel with a square cross-section. The mixing starts at the rear edge of a horizontal splitter plate separating both flows in the inlet sections of the test channel. Wire-mesh sensors with a very dense grid (1.04 mm lateral resolution in a channel of 50x50 mm cross-section), wall sensors and PIV/LIF were used to characterize the mixing process (Prasser et al., 2009; Fokken et al., 2009 and 2010; Eggertson, et al., 2011). Micro-fabricated thermoresistive temperature sensors have been developed and applied for temperature fluctuation measurements in the GEMIX channel. A description of the technique is given by D'Aleo & Prasser (2012). Fig. 3 shows the sensor, which can be produced on different substrates. The latter allows varying the thermal properties of the model wall material.
