Understanding species limits: a comparative approach along latitudinal and altitudinal gradients Species ranges are determined by many interacting factors, including dispersal ability, biotic interactions, gene flow, and the availability of genetic variation. Comparing populations along altitudinal and latitudinal gradients will help to understand the relative importance of these factors. Species ranges are determined by many interacting factors, including dispersal ability, biotic interactions, gene flow, and the availability of genetic variation. We need to understand the relative importance of these factors to be able to predict how species distributions may respond to climate change. One promising approach for achieving this is to compare populations along altitudinal and latitudinal gradients. Such gradients can cover a similar range of climatic conditions, particularly of temperature, but differ greatly in spatial scale; for example, a drop in mean annual temperature of 1 rC occurs over approximately 167 m of altitude, which corresponds to 145 km of latitude. This difference in the steepness of the gradients has important implications for ecological genetic processes affecting the degree of local adaptation. A comparison among edge populations, therefore, can exploit these differences to assess the importance of different factors in limiting adaptation. The aim of this project is to improve our understanding of (a) the genetic and ecological factors limiting species distributions and (b) the adaptive potential of populations at range margins. Populations of native ruderal plant species will be studied along an altitudinal gradient in the Swiss Alps, and along a latitudinal gradient from Switzerland to Scandinavia. The project comprises three workpackages: T ¸ A field survey serves to establish the relationship between the latitudinal and altitudinal range margin of native ruderal species and provides a basis for selecting species for the reciprocal transplant experiment and the molecular genetic studies; T ¸ A reciprocal transplant experiment along an altitudinal and a latitudinal gradient will assess differences in the adaptive potential of populations at the altitudinal and latitudinal range edges, as well as dispersal limitation along the latitudinal gradient. Furthermore, it will test whether adaptations to edge conditions are transferable between the two gradients; T ¸ A molecular genetics study will quantify genetic variability, levels of gene flow and differentiation among populations along altitudinal and latitudinal gradients. This study will contribute substantially to our understanding of determinants of species range margins. It will also help to predict changes in the distribution of plants species at the range in response to climate change.
