The bifunctional alpha-amylase/trypsin inhibitor from Ragi (RBI): Folding and three-dimensionalstructure of RBI and its interactions with the target enzymes alpha-amylase and trypsin The bifunctional inhibitor (RBI) from Ragi (Indian finger millet) belongs to a relatively new class of homologous alpha-amylase and trypsin inhibitors from plants. The monomeric protein consists of 122 residues, contains 5 disulfide bridges and simultaneously binds alpha-amylase and trypsin. We have determined the three-dimensional NMR structure of recombinant RBI expressed in E. coli. Although the overall fold of RBI is completely different from that of other trypsin inhibitors (four alpha-helices, one two-stranded, antiparallel beta-sheet), the conformation of the trypsin binding loop is virtually identical with the loops of trypsin inhibitors from other families. Like most other proteinacous, competitive trypsin inhibitors, RBI it is also a weak substrate of trypsin. To elucidate the binding mode to alpha-amylases, we have focused on the X-ray structure determination of the complex between RBI and an alpha-amylase from insects, namely the enzyme from the larvae of the meal beatle (Tenebrio molitor). We have solved the crystal structures of the free T. molitor alpha-amylase (TMA) and the complex between TMA and RBI. The inhibitor follows an entirely novel inhibition mode for alpha-amylases. Specifically, the N-terminal segment of RBI which is disordered in the solution structure of free RBI adopts a helical conformation in the TMA/RBI complex, and the free N-terminus of the inhibitor interacts electrostatically with the acidic active-site residues of TMA. The structure determination of the TMA/RBI complex in conjunction with biochemical experiments is consistent with fully independent binding sites of RBI for its target enzymes. As the inhibitor is not only found in seeds but also in the leaves of Ragi and inhibits two important digestive enzymes, it may consitute an important plant defense protein against predatory insects. We have also investigated the oxidative folding pathway of RBI and the catalysis of its folding by the disulfide oxidoreductases DsbA and DsbC in vivo and in vitro. We found that the isomerization of disulfide bonds is rate-limiting for RBI folding under all redox conditions. DsbC is a particularly efficient catalyst of RBI folding, both in vivo and in vitro.
