Causes and mechanisms of work-related musculoskeletal pain It is hypothesized that an important causative factor for recurrent musculoskeletal pain is a dysfunction of the sensory motor system leading to sub-optimal motor strategies and inducing overload of single muscle fibers and/or of microscopic tensile structures. Background: Work-related pain in the neck and shoulder are very prevalent and result in substantial costs and negative impact on quality of life. There is evidence that long-lasting low level activity of the trapezius muscle is a crucial link in the pathway from exposures, such as constrained posters and psychosocial risk factors, to the development of work-related trapezius myalgia. During prolonged muscle contractions low threshold motor units may be damaged due to continuous activation without sufficient time for recovery. Objectives: To obtain a quantitative and qualitative analysis of the daily (24hours) activity of the trapezius muscle (pars descendens) and to investigate whether it is correlated with measured, observed, or perceived mental and physical stress. Procedures: The research plan includes the following study parts. T ¸ Evaluation of trapezius muscle activity in different sleep stages in 60 nights from 20 subjects.(Thesis Christian Müller, publication: revision pending). T ¸ Relationship between trapezius muscle activity during night and neck pain after sleep in 60 nights from 20 subjects. (Thesis Christian Müller, publication in preparation). T ¸ Comparison of work demands and trapezius muscle activity during day and night shifts in 20 Swiss nurses. (Master Thesis Corinne Nicoletti, publication: revision pending). T ¸ Comparison of work demands and trapezius muscle activity during day and night shifts in 40 Japanese nurses.(first analysis done, Thesis Christian Müller, further analysis ongoing). T ¸ Comparison of work demands and trapezius muscle activity during day and night shifts in 20 Swiss computer operators.(starting 2012, Master Thesis Gabriela Helfenberger). T ¸ Case-control study in patients suffering from tension neck pain and employees selected from a questionnaire study to compare the four groups with good/bad work life balance and with/without trapezius myalgia. (PhD Thesis Corinne Nicoletti 2012-20
