Computational Nano-Optics: Shape calculus and Inverse Problems Based on mathematical tools from shape calculus and numerical methods for wave propagation we tackle the following task for optical nano-structures: (i) shape sensitivity analysis, (ii) shape optimization, (iii) inverse problem for SNOMs, (iv) shape uncertainty quantification. Nano-optics is studies and exploits the interaction of light with matter at sub-wavelength length scales. Ex- otic and interesting effects, like plasmon resonances occur, in particular, when metals are involved. They usually elude both intuition and detailed measurement such that numerical simulation becomes indispensible for understanding nano-optical phenomena. This project aims to devise and extend numerical methods for important applications in nano-optics. It will employ the most advanced techniques from computational mathematics. Algorithm development will be guided by two key configurations; firstly, resonant plasmonic dimer structures (nano-antenna), and, secondly, a scanning near-field optical microscope (SNOM). For the nano-antenna model problem a numerical prediction of the impact of inevitable shape variations on specific output functionals is envisaged based on shape gradients. This allows to weed out design whose function is compromised by manufacturing tolerances. The next step is to use the shape gradient for nu- merical shape optimization and shape uncertainty quantification, that is, the computation of statistical in- formation of output quantities from the statistics of the shape variation. The SNOM is a device for sub-wavelength optical imaging of nanometer size samples. Those are illuminated through a tip in different positions and backscattered light yields a signal. The reconstruction of the sampleSs internal structure and material properties from this signal amounts to an ill-posed inverse medium problem. Its numerical solution is an essential post-processing step in SNOM imaging. Our algorithms are to utilize regularized output least squares techniques harnessing on shape optimization and multiscale surface representation. We will rely on frequency domain field models throughout the project. Thus. a key component for all algorithms will be an accurate solvers for time-harmonic Maxwell boundary value problems. We opt for hp-finite element methods on unstructured meshes combined with both a priori and a posteriori mesh adap- tation. This is essential for efficiently resolving the vastly different length scales encountered in the SNOM setting. The field problems will also require domain decompositi- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> on techniques and the implementation of absorbing boundary conditions. A a versatile and reliable 3D field solver for nano-optic applications should be available at the end of the project.
