Na+-translocating oxaloacetate decarboxylase of Klebsiella pneumoniae The oxaloacetate decarboxylase Na+ pump is the paradigm of the family of Na+ transport decarboxylases that are present in various anaerobic bacteria. The enzyme consists of the peripheral alpha-subunit and the two membrane integral subunits beta and gamma. The alpha-subunit carries the prosthetic biotin group and catalyzes the carboxyltransfer reaction from oxaloacetate to this biotin residue. Once the carboxybiotin is formed, it switches to the catalytic site on the beta-subunit, where its decarboxylation is coupled to Na+ ion pumping across the membrane. The gamma subunit is of essence for the stability of the complex and with its Zn2+ metal ion it facilitates the carboxyltransfer reaction. Our work is focussed on the molecular mechanism by which the chemical decarboxylation reaction is coupled to the vectorial Na+ translocation. The system is investigated with a combined genetic and biochemical approach. The oadGAB genes encoding subunits gamma, alpha and beta of oxaloacetate decarboxylase of K. pneumoniae were cloned and functionally expressed in Escherichia coli. Hence, the enzyme mechanism can be investigated by the mutational approach. As a starting point, the topology of the membrane-bound beta-subunit was determined. The protein is predicted to contain 9 transmembrane alpha-helical segments connected by cytoplasmic and periplasmic loops. Sequence alignments have indicated highly conserved portions of the molecule within transmembrane helix VIII and within a region termed IIIa which inserts from the periplasm into the membrane but does not penetrate through it to the cytoplasmic surface. Hence, these areas are conspicuous of being of functional significance and indeed by site-directed mutagenesis residues D203 (in region IIIa) and N373, G377, S382 and R389 (in helix VIII) were shown to play essential roles in the catalytic mechanism. Publications: Jockel, P., Di Berardino, M. & Dimroth, P. (1999) Membrane topology of the beta-subunit of the oxaloacetate decarboxylase Na+ pump from Klebsiella pneumoniae. Biochemistry 38, 1346113472. Di Berardino, M. & Dimroth, P. (1996) Aspartate 203 of the oxaloacetate decarboxylase betasubunit catalyses both the chemical and vectorial reaction of the Na+ pump. EMBO J. 15, 1842-1849. Jockel, P., Schmid, M. Steuber, J. & Dimroth, P. (2000) A molecular coupling mechanism for the oxaloacetate decarboxylase Na+ pump as inferred from mutational analysis. Biochemistry 39, 2307-2315. Jockel, P., Schmid, M., Choinowski, T. & Dimroth, P. (2000) Essential role of tyrosine 229 of the oxaloacetate decarboxylase beta-subunit in the energy coupling mechanism of the Na+ pump. Biochemistry 39, 4320-4326.
