Implementation of Wireless Sensor Networks for Monitoring of Large Civil Structures Wireless Sensor Networks technology (WSN) provides a promising candidate technology for enabling structural health monitoring of civil structures.This project aims to enhance the currently limited long-term applicability of currently available WSN systems. A large part of civil infrastructure is currently approaching the end of its design lifetime. As a result, the associated maintenance and inspection costs are bound to increase. In an effort to reduce these costs and to properly monitor infrastructure, it is reasonable to develop monitoring systems that can alert and trigger remedial action where it is indeed needed. For the successful operation system, toward a sustainable infrastructure, reliable sensor arrays are required of such a Ssmart ¸ T as the enabling tool. Wireless sensor networks technology (WSN) form a promising candidate for enabling the deployment of dense and relatively cheap sensor arrays. Unfortunately, the long term applicability of currently available WSN systems is limited due to the lack of a power supply solution capable of supporting the sensing node for a long period of time. This project addresses this issue by combining the recently surfaced energy harvesting methods with the up-to-date data compression methods in order to create a self-sustainable wireless sensing node working in a minimal-maintenance fashion. The aim of the project is to create a reliable wireless sensor node cluster for structural monitoring together with suitable data acquisition software such that the operational power consumption is minimal. The energy self-sustainability of the wireless sensor node will be achieved by using a mechanical energy harvesting device able to scavenge power from ambient vibrations and by applying energy-aware node utilization policies. The reliability of the sensing network will be ensured via a reorganization feature developed by adapting a biologically inspired clusterization algorithm. The reduction of transmission costs will be achieved through application of a node-level compression strategy.
