Interactive Shape Deformation and Animation The goal of this project is to develop novel algorithms and user interfaces for digital shape deformation and animation that are simple and intuitive to use, automate difficult parts of the process and are fast enough for handling high-resolution digital shapes in real time. Developing methods for interactive shape design, deformation and animation is one of the core tasks of computer graphics and geometric modeling research. Digital geometric models are used in many areas, such as: engineering design and product prototyping, medical simulation and planning, architecture, special effects in films, virtual reality and games. Recent advances in 3D scanning technology enable to obtain 3D geometric data of real-world objects easily and cheaply, such that it becomes available not only to academics and professionals but the general public as well (e.g., commercial products like Microsoft's Kinect). Once a digital representation of a shape is obtained, most applications require its modification (editing, deformation, animation) to suit the application's goals. Designers and artists may want to explore various shape deformations to reach the final aesthetic and functionality, prosthetics prototypes need to be adjusted to the particular patient's geometry, and digital characters are brought to life by animators. However, designing and animating shapes on a computer significantly differs from manipulation of actual physical objects. Most tools for digital shape editing require professional training and time-consuming, tedious work. They typically have a complex user interface and demand visual artistic skills and substantial technical knowledge to operate. Research in geometric modeling and animation has seen significant progress in developing better algorithms and interfaces, yet current techniques remain to be either heavily dependent on user skills for providing proper input or not fast enough for realtime manipulation of complex digital shapes. The goal of this project is to develop novel algorithms and user interfaces for shape deformation and animation that are simple and intuitive to use, automate difficult parts of the process and are fast enough for handling high-resolution digital shapes in real time. On the algorithmic side, we wish to explore shape deformation mechanisms that use fast and parallelizable formulations such as linear blending of transformations. The biggest challenge here is to design appropriate influence functions that spread the action that the user applies to a control handle (pulling, rotation, etc.) to the rest of the shape. Traditionally such influence functions have been created in a tedious and involved manual procedure by painting them onto the surface of the shape. We aim to design a fully automatic algorithm that produces effective blending weights that adhere to the shape's features, and complement them with high-quality, smooth and intuitive deformation methods. On the interface side, our goal is two-fold: first, we wish to unify the various types of control handle mechanisms proposed so far, such as point-, region- and cage-based manipulation, as well as internal skeletons. Most current methods are optimized for one particular type of control handle. We wish to take advantage of all types of handles in one coherent framework, since each type is useful in different modeling tasks for different parts of a shape. Secondly, we plan to develop an affordable and versatile physical interface that enables posing c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> and manipulating digital objects by interacting with an actual physical representation. This physical interface can be thought of as a Lego set of controls of the modeling system which can be combined and connected to form arbitrary topological configurations. The user will then be able to deform and pose this physical representation, and the system will translate the actions onto the digital shape. Such interface frees the user from the necessity to mentally map the 2D projected image on the screen to 3D, provides a tangible object to interact with and should be accessible to both professionals and casual users.
