Cooperative Communities The project attempts to Strengthen the Relation Between Social and Physical Space through the Formation of Cooperatives in the Amhara Region of Ethiopia , investigating sustainable rural development via a pilot project for a model town with agricultural production, town infrastructure, and housing. The UN has declared 2012 the International Year of Cooperatives to call attention to their Sin¸ valuable contribution to poverty reduction, employment generation and social integrationT and the Sstrengths ¸ of the cooperative business model as an alternative means of doing business and The following project sets out to investigate sustainable furthering socioeconomic developmentT. rural development by organizing villages into small cooperative towns that act as agrarian hubs. The model to be studied integrates agricultural production, town infrastructure, and housing into a combined cooperative organization that enables poor rural communities to increase their livelihood while improving their living conditions. The goal of the study is to identify its potentials and form practical implementation strategies that would strengthen social and spatial structures to increase food security, harness natural resources and build town capacities for future growth. Concrete objectives support: -Rural development: Investigate strategies to organize land, water and food systems into productive synergy in a cooperative town model. Use a case study to form interdisciplinary implementation organize and generate economic growth, foster strategies and actuate the local agrarian hub to U participatory social development, increase local knowledge capital, and forge links between government agencies, NGOs, and rural communities. -Food security: Investigate strategies to mitigate shocks to the food system to increase agricultural production and productivity, diversify the agricultural value chain and increase livelihood for small holders. -Sustainable Natural Resource Development: Investigate strategies that harness natural resources for economic development with ecologically sustainable production practices that support longterm environmental protection. Our view is held that small rural town formation is a spatial development whose establishment is a conditional product of social, economic, political, environmental, technological, and organizational factors that need to be approached from an integrative interdisciplinary perspective. Our assumption is that leveraging collective resources can empower the rural poor by improving their bargaining power and competitiveness and access to markets, production inputs, services and knowledge. Also that cooperation enhances benefits to the community by enabling members to profit from their own common resources. The project asks three main questions that frame the leveraging of common pool resources in small rural town formation: -What are the potentials of a collaborative town model to improve sustainable rural development c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> in least developed countries? -What factors are critical to its establishment and growth? -What practical strategies foster its institutional capacity to meet objectives and how can they be implemented? The research framework focuses inquiry toward practical performance by addressing mutual forms of relation between theory and practice. A conceptual background will support the situation specific criteria of a practical case study: -Buranest at Lake Tana, The Amhara Model Town is a regionally designated pilot project that is currently being established as a new cooperative model town. It is located on 104.6 ha of rural land the capital city of the Amhara region in Ethiopia. Initials plans about 70km north of Bahir Dar U are for a settlement of approximately 120 families.
