GNSS water vapor monitoring in the Swiss Alps The 3D retrieval of the distribution of atmospheric water vapor at scales of a few kilometers by means of GNSS path delays is investigated. A measurement campaign has been carried out in an alpine area to validate the measurement quality and to test the tomographic reconstruction in a case study. Future improvements of the tomographic water vapour determination by GNSS by F. Hurter, D. Perler, A. Geiger, H.-G. Kahle In 2008, the competence center of environment and sustainability (CCES), ETH Board has cogranted a project with the acronym APUNCH (Co-ordinator: Prof. P. Burlando, IFU), which stands for Advanced Process UNderstanding and prediction of hydrological extremes and Complex Hazards . The aim of the project is to gain insight into the response of Alpine watersheds hit by strong rain events and predict the hazard potential resulting from such rain events. The following paragraphs present the research that has been carried out at the Geodesy and Geodynamics Laboratory, ETH Zürich (GGL) within the framework of APUNCH. In order to predict the hazard potential resulting from extreme rain events in watersheds, it is crucial to better understand and predict the location, time and intensity of heavy precipitation. In the classical approach, radar images are used to predict rain few hours ahead (radar nowcasting). Since high humdity in the atmosphere is a prerequisite for heavy rain, additional knowledge of the tropospheric water vapor distribution might support radar nowcasting. Numerical weather prediction (NWP) models or hybrid models with various data assimilation capabilities for rain radar data, ground meteo and satellite data can alternatively be used to nowcast rain events. To date, NWP models are inferior to classical radar nowcasting in the first 2-4 hours ahead of time due to relatively scarce water vapor measurements. A possible source of water vapor information for the NWP models are processed data of Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) receivers that deliver information on integrated tropospheric water vapor. A receiver network then allows 3D retrieval of atmospheric water vapor from the integrated values with a tomographic approach. This water vapor tomography and its use to retrieve meaningful information about the atmospheric state has been a focus of the project. The Zermatt area in the Canton of Valais (Figure 1) was chosen as study area to investigate water vapor tomography in an alpine catchment area. As the mountainous topography has a strong influcence on water vapor distribution with structures at kilometer-scale, a dense measurement network was required. In the campaign setup, 33 geodetic GNSS receivers with an average inter-station distance of 2 kilometers and 4 additional low-cost receivers were deployed during one month in summer 2010. For validation of the water vapor retrieval by GNSS, 25 radiosondes were launched in the center of the 10 km x 10 km investigation area. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> With a sofisticated software developed at the University of Bern, the GNSS raw data was processed to obtain integrated water vapor values. A thorough validation of these so-called GNSS zenith total path delays from the campaign stations was carried out. The path delays were compared to delays that were calculated from the 25 radiosonde data sets. To assess the consistency of the GNSS zenith total delays with the weather model of the Swiss Federal Office of Meteorology and Climatology, zenith delays were calculated from NWP model analysis data and compared to the GNSS campaign data. An example of such a comparison is shown in Figure 2. From our validation procedure we conclude that the quality of the total path delays of GNSS receivers is generally good and can be further processed with our tomographic software to determine the 3D water vapor field. Spatial and temporal changes in total path delay are well represented in the processed GNSS data. The results suggest that GNSS path delays are more accurate than corresponding path delays calculated from NWP model analysis data. Simulations and synthetic tests will yield further insights into the resolvability of tropospheric parameters from GNSSs and will allow a better understanding of the relation between GNSS troposphere data and NWP model data.
