Large-scale stochastic optimization for agent-based traffic simulations We propose the development of novel algorithms for the optimization of large scale agent based models of complex physical systems with an emphasis on its application to traffic simulations. We propose the development of novel algorithms for the optimization of large scale agent based models of complex physical systems with an emphasis on its application to traffic simulations. Agent-based models are particularly well suited for the description of systems such as those encountered in transportation science where large populations of heterogeneous agents interact in complex environments. In the particular case of car traffic simulation, it is crucial to identify factors influencing human travel behavior and to discover the spatial distribution of travel demand in a systematic way. Once a plausible model of car traffic has been proposed, the calibration task consists in the minimization of the difference between the model outputs and real world measurements. The underlying minimization problem has the following important characteristics: 1. The problem is continuous and it is intrinsically stochastic because of the high level of variability that traffic patterns exhibit in the real world. 2. The objective function can only be evaluated through simulations and is not known analytically. Assumptions about convexity, unimodality, or even continuity cannot be made. 3. The dimension of the search space is large (ca. 104 parameters). 4. The evaluation of the objective function is costly in term of computational resources: typical traffic simulations run for several CPU hours, use a few gigabytes of RAM and generate hundred of megabytes of results. Gradient-based optimization methods are not applicable for such problems, whereas populationbased optimization methods such as evolutionary algorithms (EAs) are good candidates. The goal of this project is to improve the predictive power of large-scale agent-based simulations by using recent advances in evolutionary computation. The application of EAs to large-scale optimization problems in the continuous domain is still an open research issue in evolutionary computation and we plan to address it in this project. Particular emphasis will be placed in : T ¸ developing EAs capable of incorporating existing information available during the optimization process and T ¸ reducing the computational complexity of the problem by developing suitable multiscale descriptions of the transportation problem The optimization algorithm will help to calibrate robustly parameters of agent-based models, by incorporating available experimental data and will assist in the discovery of underlying properties of the studied systems. We believe that the developed optimization techniques, will not only be specific to the transportation problem, but they are developed so as to provide a more general framework for the optimization of large scale agent based models as they are utilized in other scientific fields.
