Whose slavery? The language and politics of slavery and abolition in Sierra Leone 1898-1956 Slavery and anti-slavery campaigning are an important part of Sierra LeoneSs history. The problem of how discourse on slavery and anti-slavery formed part of political and social life in colonial Sierra Leone is still unresolved. This thesis seeks to set out how slavery persisted and changed. Both slavery and abolitionism have been powerful motifs running throughout the history of Sierra Leone. Sierra Leone was both the location of a large slaving port and, simultaneously, a project of ´ the abolitionist movement and both these factors form a significant part of the popular SimaginationS of Sierra Leonean history. However, little attention has been paid to how slavery has been appropriated as a political tool and powerful metaphor by a variety of actors, often with conflicting ´ ´ agendas. This thesis examines the conflicting uses of the language of SslaveryS and SabolitionS through the colonial period in Sierra Leone. Much of the literature of slavery studies is preoccupied with definitional difficulties. This thesis goes beyond these semantic arguments to take a more actorfocused approach to understanding the complexity of claims made on slavery and abolition. It will attempt to explain not only what the actors involved in Sierra Leonean slavery and abolition thought slavery was, but also how they manipulated both the meaning and rhetoric of slavery and abolition to serve their political ends. The study is concerned with four main themes: 1. Tracing the evolution of the language of slavery and abolition as powerful political metaphors, picked up by multiple actors with different agendas. 2. Challenging the dominant view of antislavery as a purely western phenomenon. 3. Highlighting the discursive power of slavery and abolition in creating communal identities. 4. Outlining the major changes in unfree labour in Sierra Leone, and the responses of the antislavery movement. ´ Throughout the period in question, SslaveryS figures as an explanation or critique of a variety ´ of phenomena. The thesis will examine a series of key Scrisis pointsS in Sierra Leonean history , where slavery or antislavery formed a significant part of debate, in order to understand how various groups understood slavery and abolition. Specifically, how did various groups use the language of slavery and/or abolition in order to make specific claims and pursue their own agendas, some only tangentially connected to slavery? To set these debates in context, the changing practices of forced labour and coercion will be outlined for each key period. By combining these two approaches, the thesis will produce a synthesised history of slavery at these points, and show how slavery as a concept became connected to a variety of different topics.
