Stress state and behavior of multidirectional laminated tube test specimens composed of unidirectional (UD) laminas The work will contribute to a new sheet of Luftfahrttechnisches Handbuch (LTH). Carbon-fiber reinforced plastics provide materials for extreme lightweight designs. Until the end of the 1980Ss, only spacecraft and military aircraft were made from such materials because of high material and manufacturing costs. The applications were mostly in form of thin shells or sandwich faces. Today we see advanced composites in many more applications, particularly sport products, and recently even in primary load-carrying structures of commercial aircraft. Many of the new applications are not within the realm of thin shell theory, and therefore modern research on the strength properties and failure behavior of composite materials addresses three dimensional stress states. The present project leader has participated in the Second World-Wide Failure Exercise WWFE II [1], where he studied [2] the predictive power of HashinSs failure criteria [3] for 12 specified test cases. Many of these involved thick-walled composite tubes which were loaded with axial force and torsion as well as subjected to pressurized liquid to create a variety of tree-dimensional stress states. R. Cuntze, an expert in the field of composite materials and author of modern failure criteria [4], initiated the project to include the experience and know-how, gained from WWFE II, in the German Aviation Handbook (Luftfahrttechnisches Handbuch LTH) [5]. The new sheet will describe testing procedures, involving thin- and thick-walled multi-layered composite tubes, and evaluations of the results. The present author was invited to contribute to the new sheet of LTH with his experience in modeling of thick-walled composite tubes [6]. 1 Hinton, M.J. and A.S. Kaddour, The background to the Second Worl-Wide Failure Exercise (WWFE-II). J Compos Mater 2012; 46:2283-2294 2 Kress, G., Examination of HashinSs failure criteria for Part B of the Second Worl-Wide Failure Exercise: Comparison with test data. J Compos Mater 2013; 47(6-7):867-891 3 Hashin, Z., Failure criteria for unidirectional fiber composites. J Appl Mech 1980; 47(6):329-334 4 Cuntze, R.G., The predictive capability of failure mode concept-based strength criteria for multidirectional laminates. Pt B, Compos Sci Technol 2004; 63:487-516 5 Luftfahrttechnisches Handbuch LTH. http://www.lth-online.de/ 6 Kress, G., Minimized computational effort for the thick-walled composite tube problem. Comp & Struct 1995; 54(4):663-639
