DYNAMITE: Dynamic Nankai Trough (Japan) and Swiss Molasse Basin: Investigating NeoTectonics, Paleo-Earthquakes and associated Geohazards; A SNF fundend research project studying the geological record of earthquaketriggered subaquatic sediment instabilities to quantitatively constrain paleoseismicity and related hazards This research program will investigate the geological record of earthquake-triggered subaquatic sediment instabilities in marine and lacustrine sedimentary archives to quantitatively constrain recent tectonic activity and paleoseismicity along subduction zones and in Switzerland. With increasing awareness of geohazards from seismic tremors, landslides and tsunamis, such geological archives are gaining importance. They allow for studying the underlying processes of geologicallypreserved events, the reoccurrence of which in a given area may pose considerable risk to offshore and onshore infrastructures, facilities and communities in the near future. To achieve these research goals, the latest generation of geophysical surveying methods, scientific offshore drilling, state-of-the-art core analysis, and in-situ and laboratory geotechnical testing will be used for 3D-imaging of sedimentary archives, sampling and dating critical structures and quantitatively analyzing the impact of earthquakes upon marine and lacustrine sediments. This modern multi-method approach will enable us to use subaquatic landslides and seafloor deformation structures as tools for quantitative paleoseismology and as proxies for reconstructing the neotectonic evolution of the investigated ocean margin and/or lake and their surroundings. The research program is structured into four subprojects, all of which address a specific theme within the overall framework of the common scientific objectives to quantitatively constrain paleoseismicity and related geohazards. The research team consists of five researchers: 2 Post-Doc (Jasper Moernaut, Katrine Kremer) and 2 PhD student (Anna Reusch and Michael Strupler) lead by principle investigator (Michael Strasser). We will focus our efforts (1) in Japan and Chile, both countries that were most recently hit by destructive earthquakes and tsunamis in 2011 and 2010, respectively; (2) in Western Switzerland (Lake Neuchâtel region), which to date has no proven record of significant earthquakes, but where recent studies have revealed seismically-active faults that potentially may be capable of producing strong earthquakes and (3) other large Swiss lakes to integrate concepts and results of basin-wide slope stability and subquatic mass movements towards establishing underwater hazards maps. In a broader context, results are anticipated to ultimately yield important means and input parameters for future, inter-disciplinary seismic and tsunami hazard assessments, both for active continental margins, in general, as well as, and in particular, for Switzerland. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2>
