Monitoring the Formation and Growth of Titania Nanoparticles The objective of the present study is to explore the formation and growth of titania nanoparticlesfrom titanium tetraisopropoxide (TTIP) in a premixed methane flame. Sectional and monodisperseaerosol dynamics models [1] for simultaneous gas phase chemical reaction, surface growth andcoagulation are further modified to account for the effect of sintering. Simulation resultsare then compared with in-house experimental data for various inlet precursor concentrations.The predictions from monodisperse models compare to experimental data for three differentTTIP reaction schemes, namely gas phase hydrolysis (dash-dot line), gas phase thermal decomposition(dash line) and surface growth (solid line), for the same sintering mechanism. Although allthe proposed reaction schemes predict rather similar average primary particle diameters faraway from the burner tip ( x = 20 cm), model predictions show more significant deviationsat the very early stages of particle growth. The smallest particle sizes are predicted bygas phase thermal decomposition for all the locations above the burner tip. Simulation resultsfor hydrolysis are close to their experimental counterparts for x > 2 cm leading however toconsiderable overpredictions at earlier locations. This trend stems from the fact that thecurrently available in the open literature hydrolysis reaction is very fast as it is basedon the assumption of rather high water to TTIP ratios. Sectional calculations elucidate theeffect of the above reaction schemes on the primary particle size distributions. The geometricstandard deviations for gas phase thermal decomposition are higher than the correspondingexperimental results at locations close to the burner tip. Finally, a model accounting forsurface growth which is later on taken over by hydrolysis seems to be a more reasonable mechanism. References PRATSINIS S. E., ARABI-KATBI O., MEGARIDIS C. M., MORRISON JR P. W., TSANTILIS S., KAMMLERH. K. Flame Synthesis of Spherical Nanoparticles , Journal of Metastable and Nanocrystalline Materials, 8, 511-518 (2000) http://www.ivuk.ethz.ch/research/ra2001/pratsinis/01tsantilis.pdfFurther information\rh
