Development of stochastic typhoon model in Northwest Pacific region and its application to portfolio loss estimation A Bayesian-based software tool is established for portfolio loss estimation due to typhoon events, which enables to integrate information, historical evidence and scientific knowledge. The tool supports decisions in insurance markets according to the level of information available. 1. Background and motivation Consistent and precise loss estimation due to typhoon damages is an important issue to decision makers in the insurance markets. Typhoon models have been developed to estimate portfolio losses. The results from the models facilitate the decision makers by determining insurance premiums for portfolios. So far, several models have been proposed and implemented into software tools, whereby the parameters which the decision makers are required to input are the information on the portfolio, e.g., locations and values of buildings in the portfolio and the insurance policy etc.. All the other parameters related to the phenomenological characteristics of typhoons and the meteorological environment surrounding typhoons, which are necessary to estimate the portfolio losses, are fixed and can not be changed by the decision maker as a user of the software. In many cases, the decision makers even do not know the assumptions on the parameters made in the software. The software is a black box to decision makers. Therefore, a decision maker is forced to choose either to believe the result if it seems reasonable to him/her, or to reject the result otherwise, without given any chance to understand the result. Furthermore, even though some additional information or data or strong belief, which the decision makers may possess, is available, there seems no way to reflect this in the process of loss estimation in the presently available software tools. Whereas the development of more sophisticated and improved models is a key to keep advantages in the insurance markets, this is not the only way and possibly not the most relevant way. In order to explain the idea behind this and our present project, three terminologies are differentiated: knowledge, data and information and the corresponding terminologies: modeling, updating and conditioning, see Figure 1. Seen in the light of this differentiation, most available software tools have been aimed to develop the models by implementing more scientific and professional knowledge. The philosophy behind developing the presently available software is to take into account as much professionally reliable knowledge as possible into the model. Once the model is fixed, there is no need to change it in daily use. Our present project, too, explores this direction to some extent, but this is not the main target. Instead, we establish a framework within which the data and the information which the decision makers possess can be implemented into the model runningly as information becomes available, namely, the model is updated by data and conditioned by information. Here, information refers to factual information or a belief which is available to a decision maker in the decision making process and data refers to an organized set of information in such a way that the data can be utilized for updating the parameters in the model. For instance, sea surface temperature is information which may affect the frequency of occurrence of typhoons, while the accumulation of information on the relationship between sea surface temperature and the frequency of occurrence of typhoon can be used to update the model. In a decision process, if such information is available, the decision maker should implement it into the model (conditioning), because the conditional model gives an estimation of portfolio loss with a smaller variance and c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> thereby enhances decision making. The parameters in the model should be modified with data (updating), because the updated model gives more reliable estimations. Apart from the professional knowledge necessary to construct a basic model, such information and data are readily available and accessible even to decision makers. The full utilization of data and information which becomes available over time is another key to keep an advantage in the market. 2. Objective The objective of the present project is to develop a framework to estimate portfolio losses due to typhoons and implement it into a software decision support tool. The framework includes not only a stochastic typhoon model but also the mechanisms which enable the decision makers to reflect the information and data during the process of loss estimation. The most of the efforts are devoted to establish a typhoon model rather than detailed modeling of damage process of buildings due to typhoon in the present project. The established framework is general, but the region of the Northwest Pacific is selected as an example. Mainly two applications are expected from the framework: 1) Estimation of annual average loss/probable maximum loss for a given insurance policy. 2) Estimation of loss of any given portfolio when a typhoon has initiated and is approaching a region. In the first application, the framework facilitates the estimation of a portfolio loss when a decision maker determines the insurance premium year to year. During the process, if he/she possesses the information which conditions the model, e.g., the prediction of see surface temperature in a year, this information can be implemented. In the second application, since the typhoon has already initiated, several information should be readily available, e.g., the track of the typhoon, the central pressure of the typhoon or meteorological environment surrounding the typhoon. This information conditions the model, enabling a loss estimation with a smaller uncertainty. This application is useful when a financial department in a company prepares for the post-disaster financing or when the decision maker makes an additional reinsurance contract to avoid a catastrophic insurance payment. In the end of a year, all the information is organized as data and the model may be updated. 3. Procedure The core of the present project is the application of the Bayesian probabilistic network and the Bayesian statistics. The former provides the way for an efficient representation of the probabilistic relations between variables and processes and the way for an easy access to the probabilistic relations in the process of modifications and extensions of the model at future points in time. The latter provides the rationale to update the probabilistic model with additional data. The main task is the establishment of the Bayesian probabilistic network for typhoon and losses due to typhoons based on the theories and data available. In order to facilitate the systematic progress, the following tasks are considered: 1) General survey of theories and models and reliable data source available. 2) Selection of the relevant indicators utilized in the present framework. 3) Development of the Bayesian probabilistic network. 4) Validation of the established framework. 5) Implementation into software. The expected duration of the project is 18 months. After 12 months, the validation of the establis- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> hed framework is discussed and possible adjustments will be undertaken. Toward the final output, the framework is implemented into a software tool. After the successful completion of the project (hereafter called, the first phase), the project is decided to be extended. The main goal of the extended project (the second phase) includes the enhancement of the wind field model and modelling of the rainfall associated with typhoon events. These improvements will be incorporated into the software tool developed in the first phase. Figure: Integration of knowledge, data and information.
