Experimental and Modeling Study of Acrylamide-FA1Quat Copolymerization The free-radical aqueous copolymerization of Acrylamide and FA1Quat is investigated with the aim of developing a kinetic model for the system. An experimental study primarily based on in-situ NMR and SEC analysis is carried out to shed light on the kinetics involved and to estimate rate parameters. Cationic water-soluble polymers and copolymers find a wide range of applications such as water purification, paper making, emulsion stabilization, optoelectronics, personal care, and biotechnology. Their basic feature is due to the electrostatic interaction that these polymers can establish in solution as well as at interfaces. Therefore, they are well suited to all of the processes where solid-liquid aqueous separation is required. A large variety of cationic vinyl monomers is available for the synthesis of these attractive polymers through free radical polymerization. Although the majority of water-soluble polyelectrolytes are obtained by polymer modification and copolymerization of already existing monomers, it is interesting to understand the kinetic behavior of novel classes of charged vinyl compounds. Among them, those exhibiting ammonium groups have the most significant commercial impact since they can be synthesized to a large variety of chain architectures and sizes. In this project, the free radical copolymerization of a quaternary ammonium acrylate, FA1Quat, with acrylamide is experimentally studied first. The cationic water-soluble copolymer is synthesized and characterized adopting experimental conditions that reproduce the industrial ones, with the aim of developing a kinetic model for the system. Copolymerization kinetics is investigated primarily by carrying out in-situ NMR reactions, in order to determine conversion profiles and copolymer composition. Molecular weight distributions are characterized by aqueous SEC. A comprehensive kinetic model is developed, on the basis of the information obtained from the experimental investigation, and parameter estimation is performed by using an optimizer.
