Contextualization of Vocational Training for the Building Sector in Ethiopia The overall focus of the project is to introduce alternative building mate´ rials and construction techniques through a Scapacity building programS with the components of establishing PhD research programs and curriculum development for Technical Vocational Training Centers in Ethiopia. The Arthur Waser Foundation, based in Lucerene Switzerland, agreed to sponsor a continuous research project called Contextualization of Vocational Training for the Building Sector in Ethiopia to the tune of 460,000 Swiss Francs over three years. The project builds on an academic research cooperation between the Ethiopian Institute of Architecture, Building Construction and City Development (EiABC) in Ethiopia and the Professorship of Dirk E. Hebel of Architecture and Construction at the Singapore-ETH Centre for Global Environmental Sustainability and the Future Cities Laboratory (FCL) in Singapore. Professor Dr. Elias Yitbarek initiated the project as part of his work at the Chair of Housing at the EiABC and has already secured funding from the Arthur Waser Foundation for a pilot project called Sustainable Rural Dwelling Unit (SRDU)in 2010, with the support of the North-South Centre of ETH Zurich, Barbara Becker and the ETH Foundation, Nathalie Fontana. The pilot was regarded as a great success. It involved building two housing units located approximately 250km south of the capital Addis Ababa, and experimentation with local building materials combined with new building techniques and autonomous operating energy supply units. This success convinced the Arthur Waser Foundation to continue the engagement with the two universities and enlarge the scope of the work to include questions of capacity building, academic exchange with local schools and industry and the transfer of knowledge to a wide academic and non-academic audience in Africa. Several PhD researchers working under the project within a newly established PhD programm of Housing, will fully concentrate their work on the development of technical solutions in earthen masonry systems and bamboo technologies, which address challenges posed by environment conditions, as well as constraints in available building materials and skilled labor. They will also look into robustly co-designed training methodologies, which target maximum cultural relevance, mechanisms for knowledge exchange, and methods for sustainable technology transfer with longterm viability. Next to the strong focus on applied research, where full scale housing units will be built, the team at the EiABC under the guidance of Dr. Elias Yitbarek will work on soft impact factors such as health issues, socio-cultural frameworks, communication strategies and participation models in order to guarantee a long lasting anchoring of the project in rural regions of Ethiopia as well as building up curricula for the academic impact in schools and universities. The ETH Zurich and the EiABC in Addis Ababa have a long history of academic collaboration. The current research project can be seen as part of a series of full scale proto-typologies being c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> build in Ethiopia, in order to establish an alternative building material use in the country. This initiative, started in 2010 by Dirk E. Hebel, who was at that time the Scientific Director of EiABC, investigates the stock and flow model of building materials in Ethiopia and introduces new building techniques and material applications such as earth masonry vaulting together with Prof. Philippe Block of ETH Zurich, in order to minimize the dependency of building material import in Ethiopia. The project got well know also in Ethiopia and beyond and set the tone for further investigations also in rural areas. With the funding of Arthur Waser Foundation, ETH and EiABC have the chance to further strengthen their research collaboration by understanding the build environment as a complex and open system, ranging from the urban territory to the neighborhood scale and with it the question of material application, considering economic, ecological, social and aesthetic values for a future urbanization of developing territories world wide.
