Die Rolle(n) von formalen computer-basierten Modellen in Planungsprozessen für eine nachhaltige Regionalentwicklung Mit dem allgemeinen Ziel, die Voraussetzungen des Einsatzes von Modellen in der nachhaltigen Siedlungs- und Regionalentwicklung zu verbessern, untersucht das Projekt die unterschiedlichen Funktionen, die ein Modell im Verlauf von Planung- und Entscheidungsfindungsprozessen einnimmt sowie den Zusamme Regional areas are highly complex systems of interwoven social, socio-technical, economic and ecological interactions and important action fields along the road to sustainable development. The identification of options and limitations for sustainable development in this context necessitates inter alia scientifically-based knowledge. This is particularly true of decision-making during planning phases as this involves the setting of the course for the future. The justified assumption exists that the provision of formal computer-models on the scientific side can make an important contribution to the generation of this knowledge. With this kind of help, complex relationships can be demonstrated and e.g. possible developments simulated by means of scenarios. Furthermore the models may support communicative interactions, like knowledge exchange or negotiations of different actors involved into the planning process. In recent years, there has been an increase in modelling activity, including the possibilities offered by computer-technical developments and spatially explicit representation using GIS (Geographical Information Systems). This is also reflected the increase in research on the development of formal computer-models which can be used as decision-making or planning support tools. On the other hand, research findings on the use of computer- models in complex planning and decision-making contexts point to their sub-optimal use which is reflected in the failure to implement the models and their results in practice for various reasons. In summary, the relationship between the models and their application context is often lacking. This can result from (a) model qualities, e.g. the model type, the model structure or the user interface and (b) the process design, i.e. the way how the model is built and implemented into practice. A promising approach to overcome this problem is, seeing the models as an integral component of planning and decision-making situations which are understood as social learning processes. Different actor groups (scientists, politicians, citizens etc.) are involved so as (1) to integrate knowledge and value concepts from different sectors (in research and in practice), (2) to ensure the acceptance of plans and decisions and (3), in this way, to improve the chances that plans will actually be put into practice. The literature suggests, that (1) the model or the modelling assumes different functions (e.g. as mediators, experts etc.) in the social interaction processes (e.g. knowledge exchange, negotiations) of heterogeneous actors, and that (2) different social interactions influence the way the model is created and later used in practice. Especially it is reported, that the involvement of potential model-users at an early stage of the modelling process is important to adapt the model to the application context and to foster its use in the Sreal ¸ worldT. To better use the potential of computer-models it is therefore of utmost importance to understand these interwoven influences, investigating the social practice of the actors in the course of the pro- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> cesses (modelling and planning) and there connection to the (a) model qualities and the (b) process design. So far empirical studies on this topic are lacking. The project aims to start here and make a contribution to the more effective and efficient use of models in sustainable regional development by providing: Comprehension of the different functions which a model assumes in the course of this kind of social interaction processes. Comprehension of the influence of the social interactions of different actors involved in the course of this kind of social interaction processes for the model. Relevance of these functions for the use of the model in practice. Connections/relationships between the functions and technical modelling qualities and design of the modelling process used. In addition to conceptual work and literature studies, two complementary case studies are being carried out on modelling and the use of selected models in planning processes by means of explorative, qualitative social research. The result should take the form of sound hypotheses for the better tailoring of models and their use in the context of planning and decision-making.
