The relationship between marine plankton diversity and ecosystem function In this project, we investigate the relationship between ecosystem composition, plankton biogeography, diversity and ecosystem function on the global scale using species distribution modelling and in situ plankton observations. Marine ecosystems are changing at an unprecedented rate due to anthropogenic climate change, yet a profound understanding of marine ecosystem function and vulnerability to change is lacking due the paucity of in situ observations characterizing their structure and diversity. This is a critical knowledge gap as marine ecosystems provide essential services and are a dominant player in the global cycling of key elements, such as carbon and nitrogen. The prevailing paradigm to describe the role of plankton ecosystems in global biogeochemical models is based on plankton functional groups, i.e., groups of plankton characterized by a common biogeochemical function, such as nitrogen fixation or carbon export. However, this concept is at present only moderately supported by observations, and it is unclear what level of taxonomic complexity of plankton is required for models to capture important biogeochemical processes characterizing ecosystem function. In this project, we evaluate two concepts, taxonomic diversity and functional diversity, to assess which promotes a better description of plankton ecosystem-level variability moderating biogeochemical processes. Taxonomic diversity is organismal diversity in the context of evolutionary clades. Functional diversity is a measure combining the value, range, and abundance of functional traits with the biomass or abundance of organisms. We focus on the relationships between taxonomic or functional diversity and the perhaps most important biogeochemical process, i.e., phytoplankton primary production. We will examine the effect of community composition on primary production using a suite of statistical species distribution models. Observed correlations of diversity metrics will then be assessed from a mechanistic standpoint using a global ecosystem model. The proposed work shall not only elucidate a theoretical basis for the parameterization of marine plankton diversity within future ecosystem models, but also help to develop a better understanding of the level of detail on community composition that is required. Although functional diversity is a well-established concept in terrestrial ecology, it has never been tested for its power to describe global scale marine planktonic ecosystem structure, due to a lack of field observations. We have the tools to overcome this limitation owing to newly available global datasets of phytoplankton abundance and biomass from the MARine Ecosystem DATa (MAREDAT) initiative. Our proposed work will provide insights into which aspects of biodiversity should be subject to conservation and modeling efforts, and whether the prevailing paradigm of classifying marine plankton into functional groups adequately represents their impact on important biogeochemical cycles.
