Cosmological Probe Integration Development of an integrated treatment of the cosmological probes through three interlinked sub-projects: Development of theoretical framework for the integrated treatments of the probes; performance of a re-analysis of the COSMOS survey and integration of galaxy clustering and CMB probes. While cosmology has been the object of remarkable progress in the last few decades, several fundamental questions remain open: what is the nature of Dark Energy and Dark Matter, which together make up 96% of the energy density of the universe today? What drives the initial conditions in the early universe, which seeded the formation structures in the universe? Is EinsteinSs theory of general relativity, our current theory of gravity, valid on the largest cosmological scales? Together, these questions pose some of the most pressing problems in fundamental physics. To answer these questions, a number of large cosmological surveys are in the planning. These surveys will provide deep insights into the unknown ingredients of the cosmological model through measurements of several cosmological probes, such as the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB), galaxy redshift surveys, weak gravitational lensing, supernovae and galaxy clusters. Until now, these probes have been, for the most part, measured and analysed separately using different techniques and only combined at late stages of the analysis, i.e. when deriving the constraints on cosmological parameters. This approach is not optimal for future surveys for several reasons. First, these surveys will cover large, mostly overlapping regions of space. As a result, the different probes will provide measurements of the cosmic structures in the same volume, and are thus not statistically independent. In addition, the analysis of these surveys require tight control of systematics effects which are best treated by a direct cross-correlation of the probes statistics. Moreover, each probe provides a measurement of the cosmic structures through a different physical field, such as density, velocity, gravitational potentials, and temperature. The most effective way to test for new physics, such as Modified Gravity, is to look directly for deviations from the expected relationships of the statistics of the different fields. The integrated treatment of the probes from the early stages of the analysis will thus provide the cross checks and the redundancy needed not only to achieve high-precision but also to challenge the different sectors of the cosmological model. In this proposal, we describe our plan to develop an integrated treatment of the cosmological probes. This will be done through three interlinked sub-projects, each led by a young researcher supported by the proposed programme. First, the theoretical framework for the integrated treatments of the probes will be developed by considering the joint measurements of the statistics of each physical field and of their cross-correlations. This will be done, in particular, through the upgrade and expansion of iCosmo, an interactive code for Cosmology that we have developed. Another sub-project will consist in performing a re-analysis of the COSMOS survey by integrating the weak lensing and redshift survey measurements. The final sub-project will consist in integrating the galaxy clustering and CMB probes with a cross-correlation of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) with WMAP data by measuring all statistics and cross-correlations simultaneously using the full 3D spherical geometry of these combined surveys. Together, the analysis of the deep and narrow survey COSMOS, that of the wide and shallow survey SDSS, and the development of the integrated theoretical framework will provide the tools necessary for the analysis of future surveys, which will cover both wide and deep cosmic volumes. This work will done using the environment and resources of our newly formed cosmology group at the Institute for Astronomy at ETH Zurich. The young researchers supported by the proposed programme, a postdoc and two graduate students, will benefit from the interactions of other mem- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> bers of the group and also from exposure to international researchers through collaborations and the participation in international conferences.
