COMET-Global: Whole-farm GHG estimation and environmental diagnostics platform The aim is to develop and deploy a state-of-the-art system (web-based, free) for full greenhouse gas accounting at the farm scale. The system will use well-validated process-based models that run with site-specific soil, climate, land use and mgmt practices data, and robust uncertainty methods. Description The main aim is to develop, test and deploy a user-friendly, farm-scale GHG estimation system (COMET-Global), for partner countries including Switzerland, several EU members, the USA, and Australia. The system development will leverage an existing comprehensive whole-farm, full GHG web-based tool, COMET-Farm (http://cometfarm.nrel.colostate.edu), developed for use in the US (Paustian et al. 2012). COMET-Farm can be used for farm-scale quantification of all major agricultural GHG source/sink categories, including soil CO2 and N2O, enteric CH4 from livestock, CH4 and N2O from manure management and CO2 from on-farm energy use. COMET-Farm employs a full spatial interface, facilitating the integration of a variety of geographically-distributed databases and user-supplied site-specific management data. The current system includes a widelyused process-based model, DAYCENT (Parton et al. 1998, Del Grosso et al. 2005, 2010) and a variety of other empirically-based emission factors (EFs) for other agricultural source categories. The COMET Global will use pan-EU databases for soils, climate and land use/management as available default data in the system. The models other than DAYCENT, such as ECOSSE (Smith et al. 2010a, 2010b), and GHG calculators previously developed by partner investigators (e.g., COOL-Farm and EX-ACT) will be incorporated into COMET-Global to provide flexibility and to meet specific requirements/preferences for different countries or GHG accounting protocols. ECOSSE is a model developed by partners at Univ. Aberdeen, UK and simulates soil C and trace gas emissions and is one of the few simulation models that can represent these dynamics in organic and flooded soils. Models will be parameterized and tested using a data from the long-term field experiments with time series measurements of crop yields, soil C and/or N2O and CH4 fluxes, involving different management treatments (e.g., fertilization, crop type, tillage, manuring). Most up-to-date methods and country- or regionally-specific EFs for other non-soil GHG emission sources will be compiled accordingly, while still retaining the option to apply a uniform set of methods and standards across all countries. Capabilities to compute uncertainty estimates will be based on state-of-the-art methods that are consistent with international standards as articulated in the IPCC 2006 Guidelines for Greenhouse Gas Inventories. For emissions sources estimated using the process-based models, a method to estimate the overall structural uncertainty of complex simulation models developed by Ogle (2010) will be adopted. To support submodel testing, uncertainty analysis and overall system evaluation, a subset of the data from long-term field experiments will be used. The COMET-Global will be translated into English, French, Spanish, German and Italian and thus will allow users to select their preferred language. Performance and results obtained with COMET-Global will be compared to those obtained from two other comprehensive, spreadsheetbased agricultural GHG emission tools, CoolFarm (Hillier et al. 2011) and the EX-ACT (Bernoux et al., 2010; Branca et al., 2013; Colomb et al., 2013 and http://www.fao.org/tc/exact). Materials and methods The Swiss proportion of the COMET Global uses soil data from the European Soil Database- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> ESDB (http://eusoils.jrc.ec.europa.eu/) available at the European Soil Data Centre (ESDAC). The database provides the main soil properties, such as soil texture, bulk density, pH, drainage class and rock content, at 1km x 1km grid resolution. The climate data (daily precipitation, maximum and minimum temperature) at the 2.2 km resolution were obtained through the Institute for Atmospheric and Climate science at ETH. The CORINE Land Use data for Switzerland are available from 1990 and used in this study to define historical land use and the data from 2012 are used to provide regionally relevant current land use/management choices. The DAYCENT model is being parameterized to Swiss climatic and soil conditions using several long term experimental data (Table 1). The parameterization of the most common crops in Switzerland, such as winter/summer wheat, rye, winter spelt, winter/summer barley, maize, field beetroot, rape, potatoes, sunflower, winter peas, soybeans and white cabbage is being done using an inverse modelling technique. The 10 most sensitive crop growth parameters for each crop are being parameterized. Data on crop productivity (yields, aboveground biomass) and SOC were obtained from three long-term experiments in Thervil (1977-2013), Frick (2003-2013), and Changings (19712013), where effect of several agricultural input systems (organic, biodynamic, conventional with and without manure additions) and soil management options have been evaluated on crop productivity and SOC change. Model parameterization will be evaluated against independent proportion of the data and the effect of parameters uncertainty on crop productivity and SOC predictions has been evaluated using the Monte Carlo approach. Table 1 Overview of Swiss long term experiments Equipment used None Preliminary results Compilation of long-term experiments data sets on crop productivity, soil C and soil GHG emissions The compilation of the data from Swiss long-term field experiments is ongoing. Up to date, data on crop productivity, soil C, soil properties and management practices from several agricultural input systems (specifically organic, biodynamic, conventional with and without manure additions) and soil management treatments from DOK (1977-2013) and Frick (2003-2013) experiments have been compiled and trans-scripted into DAYCENT files. Process-based model testing, parameterization and uncertainty DAYCENT model parameterization using Swiss long term experiments is ongoing. Compilation and configuration of spatial data sets The spatial datasets for Switzerland have been compiled. Compilation of non-soil emission parameters Peer reviewed publications and annual Swiss inventory reports reporting Swiss methods for estimating GHG emissions and EFs from enteric fermentation and manure storage have been reviewed and the data on Swiss-specific parameters have been compiled (Table 2, Table 3). Compilation/categorization of land management practices The spatial datasets for Switzerland have been compiled. Programming, software testing & debugging Translations for multi-lingual GUI c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> Discussion The project is still on progress. Table 2 Data for estimating enteric fermentation emission factors (EFs) in Switzerland. Overall higher EFs compared to default IPCC are a result of higher feed energy intake in Switzerland. Different feeding strategies and use of animal feed additives are not considered in the Swiss GHG inventory. Table 3 Data for estimating CH4 emissions factors (EFs) in Switzerland. Livestock category Relevant literature Bernoux M., Bockel L., Branca G., Tinlot M. 2010. EX-Ante Carbon-balance Tool (EX-ACT) Technical Guidelines, version may 2010, EASYPol Module 101, FAO, Rome, 79 p. Branca G, Hissa H, Benez M C, Medeiros K, Lipper L, Tinlot M, Bockel L and Bernoux M. 2013 Capturing synergies between rural development and agricultural mitigation in Brazil. Land Use Policy, 30: 507-518. Colomb, V. Martel, M. Bockel, L. Martin, S. Chotte, J.-L. Bernouxa, M. Promoting GHG mitigation policies for agriculture and forestry: A casestudy in Guadeloupe, French West Indies. Land Use Policy 39 (20
