Na+-translocating NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase of Klebsiella pneumoniae and Vibrio sp. NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductases can be grouped into three different categories: (i) a non-energy transducing type that consists of one or two subunits and has FAD as the only prosthetic group; (ii) the Na+-translocating Nqr of Vibrio alginolyticus and V. cholerae which consists of six different subunits and has FAD, a 2Fe/2S cluster and ubiquinone-8 as prosthetic groups; (iii) proton-translocating complex I, consisting of more than 40 different subunits in mitochondria or 14 different subunits in E. coli, respectively. The Na+-Nqr from Vibrio cholerae is supported to play an important role in pathogenesis and is investigated by optical and EPR spectroscopy to elucidate the mechanism of redox-driven Na+ transport. Complex I has FMN, several Fe/S clusters and possibly a quinone-like compound as prosthetic groups. Membrane vesicles of K. pneumoniae catalyze efficient Na+ translocation upon electron-transfer from NADH to ubiquinone-1. Based on inhibitor studies and N-terminal sequencing of the partially purified enzyme, it was proposed that the Na+-translocating enzyme is identical to complex I. This supposition will be further investigated by isolating the complex with higher purity and identifying its individual subunits by protein sequencing. The purified protein will be reconstituted into proteoliposomes and details of the Na+ translocation mechanism will be investigated. Future perspectives are to establish a genetic system. This will be very useful to elucidate the Na+ binding site(s) and further aspects of the Na+ translocation mechanism. Publications: Steuber, J., Schmid, C., Rufibach, M., Dimroth, P. (2000) Na+ translocation by complex I (NADH: ubiquinone oxidoreductase) of Escherichia coli. Mol. Microbiol. 35, 428-434. Krebs, W., Steuber, J., Gemperli, A.C. & Dimroth, P. (1999) Na+ translocation by the NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) from Klebsiella pneumoniae. Mol. Microbiol. 33, 590-598. Steuber, J., Krebs, W. & Dimroth, P. (1997) The Na+-translocating NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase from Vibrio alginolyticus: redox states of the FAD prosthetic group and mechanism of Ag+ inhibition. Eur. J. Biochem. 249, 770-776.
