Rooting for a sustainable future: Can Crops with Greater Rooting Systems Improve Nitrogen Retention and Mitigate Emissions of Nitrous Oxide? We plan to study the effect of rooting depth on N2O production and reduc- tion within throughout the soil profile. Four genotypes of wheat, known to differ in root growth, will be cultivated in tall columns in the greenhouse. Isotope values and concentrations of NH4+, NO3- and N2O will be assessed. Description Breeding and cultivation of crops with deep and extensive rooting systems has been proposed as a strategy to improve N sequestration in agricultural ecosystems (Kell, 2011; Powlson et al., 2011). However, little is known about the effect of root biomass and depth on N-cycling (Herrera et al., 2007). Hence, the objective of this project is to assess the effect of crop roots on N-cycling within the plant-soil system and throughout the soil profile. More specifically, the research focuses on effects of root biomass and depth on plant N-uptake, NO3- leaching, N2O emissions and gross mineral N transformations. We hypothesize that deeper and greater rooting systems will increase N use efficiency (NUE), and decrease N losses in the form of N leaching and N2O emissions (hypothesis 1). This is expected to result from scavenging of deep N by plant roots, and increased microbial immobilization of N due to increased root-derived C inputs at depth (Powlson et al., 2011). We further expect that deep roots will increase the ratio of NH4+ immobilization to nitrification, thereby sustaining increased N retention (hypothesis 2). This hypothesis is based on the observation that the proportional importance of nitrification relative to immobilization as fate of NH4+ decreases with increasing soil C and N concentrations (Booth et al., 2005). Finally, we hypothesize that the zone of maximum N2O production will be deeper as plant rooting depth increases, and that the ratio of N2O to (N2O + N2) in denitrification end-products will be smallest in treatments with the greatest root depth (hypothesis 3). In this context, it has been shown that labile C inputs from deep roots fuel subsoil denitrification, while promoting N2 rather than N2O as denitrification end-product (Jahangir et al., 2012). Materials and methods Greenhouse experiments: We designed two experiments in which root production can be seen as a major variable. In experiment 1, root growth is manipulated in one treatment by temporarily waterlogging the soil, after which the waterlogged and control treatment are brought back to the same moisture conditions. In experiment 2, we will assess N-cycling and N2O emissions across four wheat genotypes known to have distinct rooting structures and depths. For both experiments, wheat will be grown in 1.5 m tall columns at the ETH greenhouse facility at Eschikon. The columns are custom-built with a design that minimizes disruption of root growth and accommodates collection of soil subsamples, soil air and soil solution throughout the depth profile. The wheat genotypes will be sourced from AgroscopeSs genotype repositories, where Swiss wheat genotypes are conserved and managed. Hypothesis (1): In both experiments, NUE will be approximated by assessing the N content in above- and belowground plant parts at the end of the cultivation cycle, relative to the amount of N applied. Throughout the cultivation cycle, the N concentration in leaf clippings will also be assessed. Leachate will be collected from the bottom of the columns and analysed for NO3- and c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> dissolved organic N concentrations. Surface-to-air N2O fluxes will be measured daily after fertilization and twice per week otherwise by placing an air-tight cover with septum over the plants onto the columns (i.e., flux chambers mounted onto the columns) and determining the accumulation of N2O in the headspace during a 40 minute interval. Gas samples will be collected into glas vials and analysed for N2O concentration on a gas chromatograph. Hypothesis (2): In experiment 1, effects of roots on mineralization and nitrification will be inferred from changes in the NH4+ and NO3- pools. In experiment 2, Quasi-real-time gross mineral N transformation rates will be estimated with the isotope model, based on changes in concentrations and natural abundance stable isotope values of NH4+, NO3- and N2O throughout the growing season (Decock and Six, 2013). In addition, small amounts of soil will be subsampled from different depths during tillering, stem extension, and flowering for the determination of potential gross N mineralization, NH4+ immobilization, nitrification and NO3- immobilization rates using the isotope pool dilution method (Hart et al., 1994). Hypothesis (3): In experiment 1, N2O production along the soil profile will be inferred from N2O concentrations in soil air. In experiment 2, we will use natural abundance isotopes of NH4+, NO3and N2O to estimate the importance of different N2O source processes throughout the soil profile for the duration of one growing season. It has been shown that isotope values of N2O can provide information concerning the contribution of different microbial processes, including N2O production and reduction to N2O emissions (Toyoda et al., 2011). Furthermore, the zone of maximum N2O production can be inferred from concentrations and isotope values (d15N, d18O, SP) of N2O in soil air along the soil profile (Van Groenigen et al., 2005; Goldberg et al., 2010). Therefore, soil air will be sampled regularly from 5 soil depths and concentrations (experiment 1 and 2) as well as isotope values (experiment 2) will be determined via gas chromatography and isotope ratio mass spectrometry, respectively. To improve interpretation of the isotope values of N2O, we will determine isotope values of NH4+ and NO3- in soil solution, representing the source isotope value for N2O production (Decock and Six, 2013a). In addition, the flux chambers mounted on top of the columns will be operated automatically and connected to a Quantum Cascade Laser (QCL) Trace Gas Monitor, for real-time assessment of N2O fluxes and isotope values of soil-derived N2O (Waechter et al., 2008; Mohn et al., 2012). The isotope model developed by Decock and Six (2013a) will be modified and extended with a depth component in order to constrain real-time N2O reduction rates and N2O:(N2O+N2) ratios based on N2O concentrations and isotope values measured in the soil columns in experiment 2. N2O reduction rates estimated based on patterns in the natural abundance isotope values and concentrations in the soil columns will be cross-validated at discrete time points using soil incubation experiments with 15N tracers. The pool dilution incubation vessels used for testing hypothesis (2) will be equipped with air-tight caps with septa. Gas samples will be collected before destructive soil sampling for the determination of 15N in N2O and N2. For sensitive analysis of 15N in N2, the headspace of the incubation vessels will be replaced with a helium-oxygen gas mixture. N2O production and reduction rates will be calculated based on changes in concentrations and 15N enrichment of N2O and N2. Equipment used - Photospectrometer for colorimetric analysis of NH4+ and NO3- concentrations. - Gas chromatograph with electron capture detector (GC-ECD) for N2O concentrations - C and N elemental analyser for determination of C and N in solid plant and soil samples - Quantum Cascade Laser (QCL) interfaced with an automated gas sampling system to determine N2O concentrations and isotope values of N2O surface fluxes. - Trace Gas Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer (TG-IRMS) for the determination of isotope values c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> (d15N, d18O, SP) in N2O. We will use chemical and microbial methods to convert NH4+ and NO3- to N2O for isotope values analysis. Also isotope values of N2O in soil air will be determined via TG-IRMS Preliminary results We have finalized the development and validated the design of the columns and flux chambers. Experiment 1 has in December 2014 and is expected to run until April 2015. Experiment 2 is expected to start in July 2015 and end in November 2015. We are currently testing the performance of the QCL and setting up the sampling and calibration routines for experiment 2. Discussion We are still in the early data collection phase. Relevant literature Booth, M.S., Stark, J.M., Rastetter, E., 2005. Controls on nitrogen cycling in terrestrial ecosystems: A synthetic analysis of literature data. Ecological Monographs 75, 139-157. Decock, C., Six, J., 2013a. An assessment of N-cycling and sources of N2O during a simulated rain event using natural abundance 15N. Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment 165, 141-150. Hart, S.C., Nason, G.E., Myrold, D.D., Perry, D.A., 1994. Dynamics of gross nitrogen transformations in an old-growth forest: The carbon connection. Ecology 75, 880-891. Herrera, J., Stamp, P., Liedgens, M., 2007. Dynamics of Root Development of Spring Wheat Genotypes Varying in Nitrogen Use Efficiency. In: Buck, H.T., Nisi, J., Salomón, N. (Eds.), Wheat Production in Stressed Environments. Springer, Netherlands, pp. 197-201. Jahangir, M., Khalil, M., Johnston, P., Cardenas, L., Hatch, D., Butler, M., Barrett, M., O'flaherty, V., Richards, K., 2012. Denitrification potential in subsoils: A mechanism to reduce nitrate leaching to groundwater. Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment 147, 13-23. Kell, D.B., 2011. Breeding crop plants with deep roots: their role in sustainable carbon, nutrient and water sequestration. Annals of Botany 108, 407-418. Mohn, J., Tuzson, B., Manninen, A., Yoshida, N., Toyoda, S., Brand, W.A., Emmenegger, L., 2012. Site selective real-time measurements of atmospheric N2O isotopomers by laser spectroscopy. Atmospheric Measurement Techniques 5, 1601-1609. Powlson, D., Gregory, P.J., Whalley, W.R., Quinton, J.N., Hopkins, D., Whitmore, A.P., Hirsch, P.R., Goulding, K., 2011. Soil management in relation to sustainable agriculture and ecosystem services. Food Policy 36, S72-S87. Toyoda, S., Yano, M., Nishimura, S., Akiyama, H., Hayakawa, A., Koba, K., Sudo, S., Yagi, K., Makabe, A., Tobari, Y., 2011. Characterization of production and consumption processes of N2O emitted from temperate agricultural soils determined via isotopomer ratio analysis. Global Biogeochemical Cycles 25, GB2008. Van Groenigen, J.W., Zwart, K.B., Harris, D., van Kessel, C., 2005. Vertical gradients of 15N ° and 18O in soil atmospheric N2OUtemporal dynamics in a sandy soil. Rapid Communications in Mass Spectrometry 19, 1289-1295. Waechter, H., Mohn, J., Tuzson, B., Emmenegger, L., Sigrist, M.W., 2008. Determination of N2O isotopomers with quantum cascade laser based absorption spectroscopy. Optics Express 16, 92399244. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 4>
