Visual Media Retargeting Visual media retargeting concerns adapting images and video for display on devices with different resolution, aspect ratio or dynamic range, often different from originally intended format. The goal is to develop retargeting methods that preserve the media content as much as possible. The display devices for images and video are undergoing a revolution. The resolution of modern displays has significantly grown, and the transition to high-definition wide-screen format media is nearing completion on the consumer market. Next generation displays are based on high dynamic range (HDR) technology that is capable of providing a rich and faithful visual experience by boosting the luminance and contrast levels far beyond conventional displays, nearing the ranges perceived by the human visual system. However, a vast amount of legacy content is available, captured and stored using the traditional, low-resolution, narrow format, low dynamic range (LDR) pipeline. Displaying such visual media on modern television sets and monitors while taking advantage of their increased capabilities is a challenge. Additional challenges come from the fact that visual media today is consumed in many different ways: smart phones, digital pads, laptops, projectors and monitors all have different form factors, resolutions, etc. On the other hand, media content is usually created and optimized for one specific display size and resolution. Resizing images and videos to fit any display format is an interesting and practical problem. This research project aims at developing effective algorithms to adapt, or retarget visual media content to various display devices, such that the capacities of the resolution, wide/narrow format aspect ratio and dynamic range display are fully utilized, while keeping the visual data rendering perceptually faithful. Specifically, our research address two central challenges: Resizing: expansion/reduction of the resolution and change of aspect ratio of image and video data. Since novel displays enjoy high-resolution wide screen format, effective and efficient methods for upsampling and deforming legacy narrow-format data to fit these devices are needed, and viceversa for display of high-definition content on legacy- or hand-held devices. Currently only simple stretching and cropping mechanisms are widely employed for this purpose, and HDR displays have not yet been considered as target display media. Tone mapping: expansion of the luminance and contrast range of legacy LDR images and video to fit the HDR display devices. In particular, methods for dealing with imperfect (over- or underexposed, noisy and low-resolution) data need to be developed, since preliminary studies show that naive linear expansion degrades the visual display quality, overemphasizing the imperfections. The planned research broadens the understanding and practical knowledge of image and video luminance, contrast and spatial content manipulation for the purpose of display. The project will allow carrying over the participants' expertise in geometric modeling in shape space to geometric manipulation of image and color space. The results of this project will potentially contribute to the c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> future quality of the publicSs viewing experience of visual content.
