Reliable timber and innovative wood products for structures: Adhesive Bonding of Structural Hardwood Elements Micro mechanics, Delamination, Hardwood, Mechanosorption, Adhesive, Cohesion, Moisture induced stresses, Beech, Creep, Fracture behaviour, Simulation, Moisture resistance, Adhesion Structural glulam elements generally made from coniferous wood are well established in timber engineering with vast experience in construction, design and joining. Only by composing smaller, selected wood parts with bondings, could engineered structural wood elements outperform solid timber and compete with steel or reinforced concrete. Therefore reliable adhesive joints build the fundament of modern wood structures and contribute towards the success of timber engineering in general. Unfortunately cutting and re-joining wood in different order creates problems due to the natural orthotropy in mechanical and hygric properties that lead to residual stresses in adhesive bond lines. Today this uncertainty, among others like processing, drying, sorting, and grading defects, is dealt with by enforcing rather high safety factors of about 2-3 [C10] and also by restricting adhesives approved for construction. In order for an adhesive to be approved, a number of delamination tests have to be performed without significant visible delamination, such as extreme water immersion and drying cycles to address long term durability (DIN EN 301 / 302-2). Additionally, short term shear tests have to be performed, for example on block shear specimens (DIN EN 392). A high mean shear strength and required wood failure percentage are believed to indicate a Sgood ¸ T bonding. However, what should be kept in mind is that these codes were originally developed for adhesive bonding of softwood, and todaySs adhesive systems as a consequence were developed to fulfill them. Nowadays, a number of innovative developments of wood products for structural applications are based upon the application of either pure hardwoods, or hardwood in combination with softwood. Examples are highly loaded glue-laminated beech beams, that cannot be realized with softwood, hybrid beech/spruce beams, veneer based products out of hardwood like load pins or strengthened nodes made of beech or ash that are typical weak points in wood constructions out of softwood [A0]. All these ideas generate higher requirements for suitable adhesive bondings, in particular with respect to changing climatic conditions. Adhesive systems can only be successful on the international market if the durability and strength of adhesive bondings can be assured to satisfaction. Unfortunately until now, not one formaldehyde free adhesive system has been approved for adhesive bonding of hardwood for structural purposes [A2]. One reason is the fact that adhesive systems are mainly confectioned for bonding spruce, which has quite distinct pore-space characteristics from hardwood. Another reason lies in the application of the codes described above also for hardwood. However, due to the much more excessive hygric behavior of hardwood, and beech in particular, residual stresses arise that are much higher than those in softwood bond lines. It is the goal of this project to address structural bondings of hardwoods with hardwood or spruce components, to work out the foundation for new, reliable structural timber products that make local use of hardwood, wherever it is advantageous. To overcome the demanding standards, more knowledge on the physical processes happening inside components at the bond line is essential, along with reliable testing methods that focus on mechanical properties, their assessment and transferability to the structural scale. We tackle the problem from three perspectives: (i) the micro-mechanisms of failure of glued zones in wood and hard-/softwood adhesive joints, (ii) the c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> macroscopic perspective of assessing reliable failure properties for bond lines and (iii) the multifield modeling and transferability of failure of bond lines onto the structural scale. Each approach will be the thesis of one of three, strongly interacting PhD students. It is our aim to advance adhesive bonding with hardwood. Such advancements are advantageous for the Swiss forest, timber, and adhesive industry since they resemble key technology for reliable adhesive bonding of timber constructions in new applications, wood based materials, and innovative wood products.
