Community Sense and Respond Systems We tackle a fundamental question in cyber-physical systems: What is the ideal structure of systems that detect critical events ­ such as earthquakes ­ by using data from large numbers of sensors held and managed by ordinary people in the community? Early detection of critical events gives time to respond; for example, early detection of intensive shaking due to earthquakes enables elevators to be stopped at floors with doors open; electric, gas, communication networks to be placed in defensive mode; trains to be slowed down; and other defensive steps to be taken. Just as importantly, after the shaking begins, detection of where shaking is taking place helps first responders to go to the buildings and floors where they are most needed. Recent work considered community participation for reporting critical events on the web. However, delays are too long for early response. Sensors, actuators and computing nodes are decreasing in cost offering the opportunity of communitybased devices that could be used to quickly detect and respond to critical events. For example, many privately-owned devices, such as laptops and cell-phones are equipped with accelerometers that could be used for vastly distributed seismic monitoring. Advanced power meters coupled with smart appliances enables monitoring of power consumption and control of appliances when demand exceeds generation capacity. Data from GPS receivers and navigation devices in cars can be used to monitor traffic conditions, quickly detect traffic accidents and reroute traffic. Other urban sensing applications are being studied as well. Detecting and responding to critical events based on data from such community-held sensors is extremely challenging: The sensors are highly noisy, making it imperative to reason about uncertainty; false negatives can lead to disasters; and too many false positives can result in unacceptable system performance. In addition, since sensors are not owned by the application, they have uncertain availability, and are hence not reliable sources of data. It is also necessary to reason about data from highly heterogeneous sources: For example, in the seismic monitoring example, one would like to combine data both from mobile devices such as laptops and cell phones, as well as stationary, statically deployed accelerometers. In addition to challenges arising from the characteristics of community-held sensors and from reasoning about their data, there are difficult challenges associated with the underlying distributed system architecture. For example, due to limited computation capabilities at the nodes in the sensor network, it is important to deploy computation nodes that aggregate data from parts of the network and make decisions based on the obtained data. In order to minimize the response time, it is important to optimally allocate these resources. In this project we develop a theory for Community-based Sense and Respond systems for critical c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> events. We pursue a robust decision theoretic approach towards optimizing distributed response, taking into account the uncertainty due to noisy sensor data, without making strong prior assumptions about event likelihoods. Based on this theory, we develop a methodology to perform robust inference about the occurrence of critical events, and to determine optimum (or at least good) responses in the presence of uncertainty using robust decision theory. One important aspect of the problem is, for each sensor and actuator to determine, whether an immediate decision should be taken, or whether uncertainty needs to be reduced by collecting more data in order to minimize false positives. Hence, an important aspect of this methodology is quantify, in a distributed manner, the value of information obtained by waiting for more data. Since the underlying network infrastructure will have an important impact on the communication of decision-relevant sensor data, studying network design considerations is of crucial importance. We develop theory that cuts across application domains. We empirically validate the theory on real data and testbed deployments from several application domains. Our multidisciplinary team working with collaborators in the U.S. Geological Survey and Southern California Edison has access to the systems and data to validate our theory on problems that are critical for society.
