Development of criteria for scale-up and scale-down of bioreactors for cultivation of mammalian cells Understand and improve the production of therapeutic proteins at manufacturing scale. The research aims of this project are: (1) Understanding the influence of different process parameters and (2) investigation of observed heterogeneities, seen in 15000L bioreactors, on product quantity and quality. The production of therapeutic proteins is nowadays one of the most important and most beneficial markets for pharmaceutical industry. Applications are illnesses like Alzheimer's disease, Sepsis, Crohn's disease, Parkinson and a wide range of different cancer types (e. g. breast cancer, colon cancer). The high specificity of a therapeutic protein makes it much more effective than classical chemical compounds usually used in the pharmaceutical field. Especially monoclonal Antibodies (mAB) are nowadays the method of choice for cancer therapy. However, the structure of such proteins is too complex to be produced by chemical synthesis, so usually mammalian cells are employed for their production. This is due to the fact that those proteins are post translational modified in the Golgi apparatus by addition of glycans or clipping of amino acids. Growing mammalian cells in fermenters to produce the protein of interest is a very delicate process. Process parameters like pH or dissolved oxygen concentration need to be controlled very strictly to guarantee the consistency of a product. Minor deviations of the predefined process parameters can easily result in changes of product quality attributes like glycosylation, aggregation, c-terminal clipping or acidic variation, which can affect the pharmacokinetics of the protein. The aim of this research project is, on the one hand, to understand the connection between process parameters and quantitative protein production as well as the influence on product quality attributes. On the other hand the project focuses on the investigation of specific problems occurring during up scaling of mammalian cell culture processes to several thousand liters (15000L). During large scale fermentation heterogeneities like hydrostatic pressure, none well mixed zones or unevenly distributed nutrients need to be considered and could affect process performance. Therefore the investigation of large scale heterogeneities and their influence on the cellular growth and productivity is an additional aim of this project. Different approaches will be followed to investigate the described research aims. Small scale bioreactor cultivation will be used to investigate the influence of process parameter on selected mammalian production cell lines. This will provide deeper understanding in which way process parameters and product quality are connected. Computational fluid dynamics will be used to simulate a pharmaceutical process, of our industrial cooperation partner. This will be done for several scales from 3L up to 15000L agitated bioreactors and will provide information about possible heterogeneities in large scale. Characterization of the chosen bioreactors via kLa measurements, mixing time ana- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> lysis and analysis for CO2 removal will be performed and compared with the computational model. This comparison will be used to validate the applicability of the CFD simulations. Simultaneously we will develop small scale models, which are able to simulate specific large scale heterogeneities in Shear Stress or O2 distribution as well as perturbations in pH or osmolality.
