Rockfall protection system design and optimization with FEM: Rockfall impact on flexible UHS steel wire nets In collaboration with Geobrugg AG and WSL, we implement an advanced FEM scheme which allows for a better description of the physics involved in impact problems related to rockfall. The model accounts for several complex physical processes. Flexible, light-weight steel wire net barriers are used to stop falling rocks serving to protect villages and roadways in mountainous regions. The Ultrahigh strength (UHS) steel wire net types used to intercept the rocks are difficult to design because of their complex geometry and highly nonlinear response under impact. We implement an advanced FEM scheme which allows for a better description of the physics involved in impact problems related to rockfall. The model accounts for many complex physical processes: high-speed impact, contact with sliding friction, damage initiation and evolution, and strain-rate dependent material behavior. These physical aspects have been taken into account and the parameters have been calibrated with real test data improving both the accuracy and predictive value of the simulations. The numerical scheme relies on a general contact algorithm, in which the hard contact behavior is approximated using a penalty method. The steel wire nets are modeled by means of linear beam elements. Normal and shear contact forces are taken into account. Material data is provided by the industry partner. The FEM will be validated using full-scale tests and further laboratory tests will be performed in order to determine the mechanical properties of the nets and develop a strain rate dependant constitutive model. To perform the numerical simulations of the rockfall impact an explicit integration scheme is used. The steel cables and some of the net elements consist of several wire strands. We develop macroscopic elements based on the mesoscopic behavior of the structure so as to improve computational performance. This allows for a consistent definition of rate dependant material data. Non-linear contact frictional laws need to be explored due to possible high contact pressures. The developed frictional law will be a function of the relative velocity of the sliding interfaces
