Efficient detectors for tomography with fast neutrons Efficient detectors for imaging with fast neutrons are being developed and tested at a plasma D-D fusion neutron source. The project explores the potentials for a tomography with fast neutrons. Imaging with neutrons has always been considered as a useful complement to the use of X-rays and gamma radiation thanks to a specific sensibility to material containing nuclides of low mass number, which creates contrast conditions interesting for many applications. This is especially useful for investigating robust objects containing heavy elements in construction materials. The recent international trend is to develop time-resolved, high spatial resolution tomographic imaging techniques with X-rays controlled by deflecting or pulsing of electron beams to vary the aspect angle during acquisition of projections necessary for tomographic image reconstruction. The proposed PhD project will be part of a feasibility study on the application of similar techniques to apply neutrons instead of X-rays. The feasibility study will be performed as a combination of theoretical modeling and experiments. The test of chosen detector configurations is carried out experimentally. In this line, the Laboratory of Nuclear Energy Systems (LKE) of ETH Zurich in cooperation with the Laboratory of Thermal-hydraulics (LTH) at PSI, is setting up a pulsed deuterium-deuterium (D-D) fusion based compact neutron generator. It is a one-of-a-kind device developed in cooperation with and constructed by Prof. Ka-Ngo Leung from the University of California, Berkley. The strength of the source is not sufficient to perform fast tomography, but allows determining the efficiency of combinations of appropriate scintillator materials coupled to photon detectors, to demonstrate the spatial resolution necessary for radiographic and tomographic imaging and to perform first imaging experiments. On the other hand, the output of the source is not sufficient for fast imaging or tomography. For this, a considerable future effort is needed to upgrade the source or to change to alternative processes for the neutron generation, whereas the detector configurations resulting from the proposed PhD project can be directly used for the final purpose of tomography with fast neutrons. They are independent from the speed of the imaging in a wide range of measuring rates and can be applied also for time averaging tomography. Options for a direct use of the results as well as alternatives to a tomography will be investigated as well. In case of the successful demonstration of the feasibility of fast tomographic imaging with fast neutrons, the way will be open towards a prototype facility with unique features that can find wide application as a user facility for different fields of research and technology. The imaging system being currently considered is an arc-shaped array of several hundred fast neutron detectors, each consisting of a plastic scintillator coupled to a multi-pixel Geiger-mode avalanche photodiode (G-APD). Using the Monte Carlo transport code MCNP5, the potential of c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> this system was studied in the context of a deuterium-deuterium (DD) fusion neutron generator with a neutron emitting spot size of a few millimeters. The ability for such an imaging system to resolve voids in 2D water-filled objects was shown to be limited by the emitting spot size in the best case. The number of detectors in the array, the size of the scintillation volumes, and the threshold of energy deposition in the scintillator considered to register a count all affect the detection efficiency and the quality of the reconstructed image. Increasing the detector depth and reducing the energy deposition threshold increase the neutron detection efficiency, but at the cost of an increasing number of secondary counts resulting from multiple neutron scattering in the arc, which can have detrimental effects on the final image. The scintillator size and energy deposition threshold also affect the number of background counts resulting from scattering off of structural material such as the floor and walls where the DD generator is located, which can also negatively affect the reconstructed image. In order to reduce exposure times, the detection efficiency should be as high as possible, but this can come at a cost of image quality. An attempt was made at optimizing the plastic scintillator volume and energy deposition threshold in order to balance these competing effects. There is a close cooperation with the Paul Scherrer Institute, where the plasma DD fusion neutron generator has been installed (Fig. 1). It has been successfully commissioned in 2011. The achieved neutron output is 3e6 1/s and still stays significantly below the design value of 1e8 1/s. The reasons are under investigation. There is still a problem with the quality of the vacuum in the target chamber and very likely an overheating of the target, which leads to an evaporation of already deposited deuterium from the titanium. The next steps will improve the geometry to achieve better evacuation of the target chamber and an active target cooling will be installed. Parallel to the development of proton recoil scintillator detectors, a postdoctoral student of PSI is developing alternative detectors for fast neutron tomography by combining THick Gaseous Electron Multipliers (THGEM) with a stack of hydrogen containing foils (e.g., polyethylene), immersed in a gas medium and arranged perpendicularly to the direction of the neutron beam. It was shown by theoretical modeling, that a sensor for a fan beam tomography setup can reach a detection efficiency of about 5-10 % for 2.45 MeV neutrons.
