Zurich meets New York A pivotal contribution of ETH to the Zürich meets New York festival in May 2014 will be an architectural exhibition design by Dirk E. Hebel and Philippe Block using recycled waste materials, demonstrating how ETH Zurich is at the forefront of research on waste as a construction material. A major thematic topic of ETH ZurichSs contribution to the Zürich meets New York festival will ´ be SFuture Resilient CitiesS. Resilient cities are those that are able to master a crisis and which are able to exit the state of crisis stronger than before. The crisis can be a war, natural catastrophes, economic developments, or unprecedented growth, as it occurred in Europe and North America after the industrial revolution, and as it presently occurs in the cities North and South of the equator, where now the majority of the worldSs population lives. Resilient cities have the capacity to learn, to remember, and to transform findings of the past into strategies for the future. Sustainability is a good basis for resilience. Resilient cities have a high degree of recycling and turn waste into new and useful materials. Resilient cities transform urban farming, energy generation and information sensing and processing into a lifestyle. Future new cities must be planned for resilience. Existing cities can be transformed to become more sustainable and resilient. ´ The topic of SFuture Resilient CitiesS will be addressed during the Zürich meets New York festival in May 2014 in several contributions produced by ETH Zurich. We seek the financial support of Swiss Re USA for the following specific items: THE STRUCTURES One of the possible materials to build future resilient cities already exists in our current urban systems: WASTE. According to the Worldwatch Institute, worldSs growing population and prosperity will double the annual production of Municipal Solid Waste by 2025. This means that its volume will most probably increase from todaySs 1.3 billion tones to 2.6 billion tones. Are we able to activate this material for the urban construction process? If so, a metabolistic thinking could emerge whereby the city is constantly producing the very matter it needs to grow without exploiting natural resources. Despite growing awareness in the area of urbanization and waste management we are still strongly ´ attached to a linear thinking, often called SCradle to GraveS, where products once used are destined for a landfill or an incineration plant. Concepts for future resilient cities call for architects and designers to think, work, and create in a metabolistic manner already envisaging second life cycles of products. The well known Cradle to Cradle o (C2C) model, created by architect William McDonough and chemist Dr. Michael Braungart, enables used products to be regenerated and redesigned for a second life cycle. This holistic framework, incorporating ecologic, industrial, social and eco- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> nomic principles, aims to create efficient systems that ideally will lead to a waste-free society. The C2C movement looks at the products through the lens of health, economy, social value, renewable energy and CO2 footprint, influencing the consumerSs way of thinking. Urbanization and financial status of diverse societies tend to determine the type of waste generated. As the people grow wealthier and move towards urban conglomerates, so does the percentage and location of the inorganic substances. The share of organic waste in the rural areas, on the other hand, reaches up to 85 percent, according to the Worldwatch Institute. Thus, it is important to be global in thinking and local in acting. One example to activate refuse products is to research on how to enhance a paradigm shift to use waste as a building material through innovative design. As such, a product could already be equipped with all necessities to function as a building element in its second life. Each day, 3.6 million tons of goods are being discarded worldwide which could potentially be reactivated in the building sector. Those waste products, but also locally available organic materials from agricultural production, which were not used in the construction sector yet could be recognized as basic elements of the urban creation process. Their use, re-use, and potential for replacement of other materials are the main steps in creating identity, resource efficiency, and make an urban system resilient by creating local value chains and decrease the dependency on imports. In this sense, analyzing the potential of refuse products as a resource for new construction materials could be a key factor of future resilient city concepts. Building with waste in Vanderbilt Hall A pivotal contribution of ETH Zurich to the Zürich meets New York festival will be the architectural exhibition in Vanderbilt Hall that emphasizes questions of resilience and sustainability. As one of the festival highlights, Assistant Professors Dirk E. Hebel and Philippe Block will build several large architectural structures made of recycled waste materials (PET and paper) at Grand Central Terminal demonstrating how ETH Zurich is at the forefront of future-oriented thinking and research on waste as a construction material. Only in the USA, every day 60 million plastic water bottles are used. It is estimated that, despite new trends, approximately 86% of the used ones are not recycled. This means, that every second about 1500 plastic bottles are being discarded in the USA and end up in landfills or the ocean. These horrifying statistics create a justified platform for innovative thinking. The Professorship of Architecture and Construction of Dirk E. Hebel at the ETH Future Cities Laboratory in Singapore is trying to tackle this challenge and designed a method how to use discarded PET bottles as a stiffening element in a vacuumized building structure. The bottles, which can be found in any trash bin in New York, are packed in prefabricated arch-shaped foil tubes. Once filled, the tubes are vacuumed and create a light-weight, inexpensive, and very efficient self-sustainable structure which can be used to create large span spatial arrangements. The Professorship of Building Structures of Philippe Block at the Department of Architecture at ETH Zurich investigates into a different set of data, which indicates that an average American uses more than 336 kg (748 pounds) of paper per year out of which only 45% is recycled. With his team, Philippe developed a method how to use this incredible resource to produce building blocks which are used to construct large span vaulting structures. Being erected in Vanderbilt Hall, the vaulted structures are constructed following the same traditional building technique known in the c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> USA as Guastavino vaulting, used for several historic floors and roofs in New York City. In fact, the Oyster Bar at Grand Central Terminal, constructed by the Guastavino Company in 1912-1913, is located directly underneath the exhibition area and creates a century-spanning tie between a traditional and very successful construction method of New York being revisited with new structural shapes and a new building material of the future: waste. Understanding the city In order to make cities more resilient, we need to understand the interacting functions of the city, as well as their influence on its people and on the physical, built environment. The concept of stocks and flows is helpful to understand and define the factors that shape the city and make it prospering over a long period of time. Important stocks and flows of a city are related to its people: entering the city, living in the city, and leaving the city; its materials, its water, its energy, its finances, the health of its population, its density, and its information. Each one of those stocks and flows is critical, but none of them by itself will guarantee the resilience of the city. Cities and organisms Cities are not organisms, but they bear similarities to organisms: they have a physical presence, a metabolism, and they constantly change. They normally start small and eventually reach a status of balance or maturity. They can grow and prosper, degrade and die. Yet each of these phases can ´ population be radically different from known organisms. Although more than half of the worldSs ´ cities are not sustainable. Their resilience greatly depends on the lives in urbanised areas, todaySs factors that led to their establishment and on the forces that drive them. But their resilience mostly relies on the initiative, ingenuity and adaptability of its people. Resilient urban patterns Few cities today are designed and built from scratch, and only very few of those that are, were successful immediately. Examples are Brasilia, Chandigarh or Masdar. Instead, a city develops under the constant interaction with its changing environment, starting from the choice of its site and the preconditions that can foster or hinder its development. Sustainable cities consist of sustainable urban patterns. Resilient cities display resilient urban patterns. Sustainability and resilience are interrelated, and design planning must be based on the knowledge of context-based best practice for sustainable and resilient urban patterns. Sensing, sourcing, and Urban Big Data In the past, city planners used geometric and mathematical rules to design, engineer, and build the city - its inhabitants had to adapt to the results of these decisions. Cities were expected to function and grow for a long period of time. Rarely were they planned for the constant interaction with their increasingly independent and mobile citizens who demand changes. Today, crowdsourcing and sensing provide powerful instruments to dynamically influence the design and management of cities. This applies mostly to existing urban systems with a large number of people with smart phones, who actively influence the development of their city. Cities are also installing an ever growing number of sensors that are able to monitor the day-to-day operations, as well as to alert with regard to expected natural or other threats. Sensing and sourcing also leads to Urban Big Data. The combination of crowd sourcing and urban sensing can increase the resilience of cities, but only if the necessary governance precautions are taken to avoid the misuse of the sensing and sourcing data. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 4> Prosperous and resilient or poor and vulnerable The selection of a suitable site for a city and its original governance setup has long lasting influence on its performance. Depending on the degree to which the city forms as the result of communal effort under good governance, it will become prosperous and resilient and achieve a high degree of livability, thus making it attractive for sustainable growth. But if the city is built for a single dimensional purpose, encouraging a monoculture and not encouraging diversity, chances are that it will become poor and vulnerable as soon as the conditions for its original success change. Therefore, diversity is a crucial precondition for resilient future cities. Simulating future resilient cities The combination of new materials, powerful information technology, sensing and sourcing, Urban Big Data and the development of intelligent computer algorithms improves our capability to look at the consequences of decisions before they are actually made. It requires the construction of computer models that represent the behavior of cities in the best possible way. These models will be able to handle the different scales of the city, which reach from the building scale to the neighborhood and urban scale, to the territorial scale encompassing the city and its hinterland as an urban-rural system. This way, simulation becomes a necessary instrument for the citizens and the city government to explore future scenarios. The more realistic the scenarios are, the more they emerge in participation with the citySs present and future inhabitants, the more likely they will support the avoidance of risk, and increase the resilience of cities.
