NCCR Climate Project GLOBCLIM (Global Climate Processes and Scenarios) The most powerful tools to investigate the sensitivity of the EarthSs climate to anthropogenic perturbations are three dimensional numerical models of the climate system. In the framework of National Competence Centre for Climate Research (NCCR Climate), GLOBCLIM is maintaining and running a global climate model (ECHAM5) at the Swiss Centre for Scientific Computing (CSCS). In general, progress in global climate modeling can be expected from an increase in resolution as well as improve-ments in understanding and parameterization of inadequately represented or entirely missing key climate processes. GLOBCLIM investigates selected aspects of both issues. In the first phase of NCCR, the focus was on the improvements gained with increase in resolution. One advantage of global high-resolution experiments is an improved representation of topography and associated effects, such as oro-graphically induced precipitation, which is of key importance for mountainous areas as well as high latitude regions. This enables a more realistic simulation of the accumulation changes under greenhouse forcing for estimates of mass balance changes on mountain glaciers and polar ice sheets, and their respective impact on global sea level. Several related studies have been completed in the project during phase 1. The high resolution experiments further allow for improved estimates of shifts in water re-sources under changing climates. The results of new high resolution simulations with ECHAM5 available for phase 2 will provide a database for various climate change related studies within the NCCR community as well as for nesting of regional models over Europe. Preliminary comparisons of our results with high resolution GCM experiments performed in other modeling groups suggest that the latest generation of high resolution GCMs may be quite consistent in their regional climate change projections under greenhouse forcing. This is an encouraging result for the analyses planned in phase 2. In addition to the aspect of higher resolution, phase 2 will address also selected issues of neglected or crudely repre-sented processes in GCMs. In several studies carried out during phase 1 serious limitations in the radiation budgets and in the surface exchange processes of climate models were detected. In addition, evaluations of the radiation databases available at the applicantsS ´ institute revealed significant trends in surface radiation, some of them now referred to as Sglobal dimmingS. These trends are not adequately reproduced in climate models, and may largely affect surface climate as well as the global hydrological cycle. A key factor for the explanation of the cited GCM biases as well as the observed trends may be aerosol, with its direct and indirect radiative effects. However, these effects are still very crudely represented in climate models. GLOBCLIM investigates this issue based on the GCM used in the 1st phase, updated with comprehensive aerosol and cloud microphysics modules. GLOBCLIM continues to focus on large scale processes and global change scenarios, based on the expertise and tools developed in the NCCR first phase. In the second phase we would like to c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> address the following questions: -What are the projected climate changes in state-of-the-art high resolution GCMs, and how consistent are these models including their nested regional models regarding projections of climate change on regional scales? - Do state-of-the-art GCMs adequately represent the radiation budgets, and are they capable of explaining the trends emerging from the observational records? - How sensitive are the global energy and water cycles and associated distribution of water resources to changes in aerosols and their associated direct and indirect cloud radiative effects?
