Robustness and design principles of cellular control circuits Robustness, the insensitivity to a wide range of perturbations, is a characteristic property of many living systems. Here, we systematically analyze robustness properties of cellular control circuits through a step-wise computational biology approach to derive more general design principles. Complexity is a hallmark of control circuits in living systems, which makes their understanding and eventually the targeted manipulation, for example, in medical applications, a highly challenging task. Robustness, the insensitivity to a wide range of perturbations, is another characteristic property of these circuits, and it appears to be a major driving force for cellular complexity. Importantly, the requirement for robust performance imposes severe constraints on possible designs of cellular circuits. Hence, by in-depth understanding of how robustness is achieved in cellular control circuits, it will be possible to infer general design principles underlying those circuits. However, analysis of robustness in biology, which requires quantitative and formal approaches at the system level, is at a very early stage. A number of case studies for specific biological systems have been performed, but most of them provide only limited insights, also because robustness itself is a complicated set. As another extreme, high-level abstraction for design principles have been proposed that currently lack rigorous assessment through biologically relevant examples. Here, we systematically analyze robustness properties of cellular control circuits through a stepwise, modular computational biology approach to derive more general design principles underlying robustness in cellular control circuits, and to evaluate two major high-level theories on robustness in cell biology. The key approach is a comprehensive characterization of robustness properties through developing general analysis methods and specific mathematical models for example systems of increasing complexity in terms of dynamic behavior and number of components, proceeding from major types of building blocks for cellular control circuits to the complex circadian clock that generates 24-hour rhythms in many organisms. External collaborations will enable the development of a comprehensive and biologically realistic mathematical model of the mammalian circadian clock and its analysis. Specifically, we aim at (i) developing theoretical methods for predicting sensitivity and robustness of network parts and for identifying the associated design principles, (ii) systematically relating information on network structures to robustness properties ´ for cellular circuits, (iii) evaluating the Sbow-tieS hypothesis stating an optimized, uneven distribution of fragilities, and (iv) identifying the role of multiple feedback loops in the mammalian circadian clock. Design principles and prediction methods regarding the robustness of cellular control are likely to have a major impact on (i) systems analysis by providing criteria for mathematical modeling and experimental design, (ii) systems understanding through design principles connecting network structures and functions, (iii) targeted manipulation by the ability to predict points of sensitivity that could be exploited e.g. in drug development, (iv) forward-engineering of reliable circuits in the nascent field of synthetic biology and (v) circadian biology by elucidating the roles of feedback loops in the mammalian circadian clock.
