Self-Widening of Gravel Bed Rivers by Lateral Erosion and Bank Protection This project aims to identify and to describe the lateral erosion process representing a hazard for infrastructures along rivers and to develop and establish design criteria for simple and low-cost measures to limit lateral erosion. The flood events having occurred during the last years have demonstrated that rivers require more space. An effective river restoration measure to guarantee the protection against floods and to improve the river ecosystems involves river widening, therefore. By removing existing bank protection works allows for lateral erosion and consequently widening of a regulated river reach. However, lateral erosion may not progress unlimited because of urban areas and infrastructures located often in the vicinity of rivers. The purpose of this project is to investigate the temporal and the spatial evolution of lateral erosion in gravel bed rivers by means of hydraulic experimentation. Furthermore, effective bank protection measures are to be developed and tested to prevent erosion damages along the widened reaches. The experiments will be conducted in a concrete flume 28.5 m long and 3.2 m wide at the Laboratory of Hydraulics, Hydrology and Glaciology (VAW) of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH), Zurich. The results of these hydraulic simulations will be compared with available prototype data of lateral erosion on different Swiss rivers. 1. Lateral erosion in gravel bed rivers The influence of the relevant parameters, i.e. the water discharge, riverbed slope, sediment supply, grain size distribution and initial river width will be investigated. These parameters will be systematically varied to describe the temporal and spatial evolutions of lateral erosion process by means of empirical relations derived from the parameters in consideration. Bed topography will be regularly surveyed to document and to quantify the lateral erosion process including their short and long term effects on the river morphology (scour processes, formation of bars, slope changes) and on the sediment balance. 2. Bank protection measures Before the lateral erosion reaches areas such as the infrastructure to be protected, the erosion process must be stopped. Therefore, effective measures have to be investigated to control the evolution of the lateral erosion. In this PhD-thesis so called sleeping protection measures will be developed. These focus simple and low-priced bank protection works, which are passive as long as the river does not reach them by lateral erosion, but become effective later.
