Optimization and Planning of Hydro-Power Production The goal of this project is a prototype software which assists power producers with an (risk-) optimal medium-term production strategy for typically Swiss hydro storage power plants. Key aspects of the software is the integration of stochasticity and consideration of ancillary services. Introduction A significant portion of electric power in Switzerland is produced by storage hydro power plants, which enable the storage of water inflows to schedule power production at convenient times, i.e. producing energy in most attractive economical conditions. The storage capacity is however limited and the evolution of influence factors such as electricity prices and water inflows not fully known in advance and volatile. Therefore to take a correct decision about the utilization of the water in reservoir is not trivial at all. A traditional way of addressing these uncertainties is to rely on tacit knowledge and/or improve the forecast of the volatile factors (e.g. a Hourly Price Forward Curve). This is however becoming increasingly more difficult with the structural market changes (e.g. ancillary services markets) and price dynamics (e.g. negative prices). Goals of the project The goal of this project is a prototype software which assists power producers with an optimal production strategy for typically Swiss hydro storage power plants (relatively small reservoirs, high heads, complex structure). Key aspects of the software is the integration of the market and regulatory conditions in Switzerland (e.g. handling of ancillary services) as well as the consideration of uncertain factors (e.g. water inflows, market prices). With this software it shall be not only possible to plan the energy production more profitable and more robust but also to plan it with a minimized and known risk. Project Description Proposed for the medium-term planning is an algorithm, which decomposes the problem into inter- and intrastage subproblems. With this formulation it is possible to account for hourly flexibility like hourly bidding, production and water balances for a time horizon of typically a full year. Secondly the provision of secondary frequency control reserves are considered. This results in both decision support for these products as well as realistic water values. Solution method is stochastic dynamic programming (SDP) for power plants with a few reservoirs and stochastic dual dynamic programming (SDDP) otherwise.
