Mountland; Sustainable land-use practices in mountain regions: Integrative analysis of ecosystem dynamics under global change, socio-economic impacts and policy implications The project aims at contributing to the development of adapted land-use practices and innovative policy solutions for mountain regions that warrant the life-supporting services required for sustainable development, are economically and ecologically efficient,and socially and institutionally feasible Mountain ecosystems provide a large array of goods and services, which are highly sensitive to both climatic and land-use changes. The political system with its policies and governance structures has a crucial role in mitigating the impact of such changes and enhancing sustainable management practices. The primary goals of this project are to contribute to the development of adapted land-use practices and innovative policy solutions for mountain regions regions that (1) warrant the life-supporting services required for sustainable development,(2) are economically and ecologically efficient, and (3) socially and institutionally feasible. We apply an integrative approach by combining methods of economics, political science and natural sciences to analyze ecosystem functioning and management in mountain regions under climate change. The following issues will be addressed: i) What is the effect of a changing climate on sensitive natural processes and their spatial interactions that determine the ability of mountain ecosystems to provide crucial goods and services? ii) What are the socio-economic impacts of a change in the selected ecosystemsS goods and services? iii) Which sectoral and cross-sectoral policies and policy instruments exist that affect these socio-economic implications, and which innovative policy solutions are useful to mitigate negative effects? iv) What are the effects of policies concerning land-use and the scale of land-use patterns on the spatio-temporal development of landscapes and their functions? To achieve these goals and to answer these questions, we combine methods, models and data of ecosystem research, economics and political science, thus bringing together the broad expertise in these fields that is available in the ETH domain. Scenarios of ecosystem responses to global changes (Task 1) are modeled in 3 mountainous case study regions. These regions are situated in the Jura (pasture-woodland ecosystems), in the Central Wallis (drought-sensitive inner Alpine ecosystems), and in Davos (temperature sensitive high Alpine ecosystems). The three regions differ in terms of their expected sensitivity to climate change, in terms of the relevance of different ecosystem goods and services and in terms of the relevance of different sectoral and cross-sectoral policies. Ecosystem responses are analyzed and modeled by taking advantage of (i) cutting edge approaches to dynamic, spatially explicit landscape-models and (ii) experimental and observational ecological approaches to specifically improve critical components of these models, including the response to changed grazing regime, competition, drought, soil heating, elevated CO2 or avalanche disturbance for sensitive ecosystem processes, and (iii) the integration of plot-based observational and experimental evidence in the modeling and upscaling framework. In the socio-economic module (Task 2), the respective changes in ecosystem goods and services under the effect of climate change and adapted land-use strategies are evaluated and combined with consistent socio-economic scenarios of land use. Policy developments and innovative policy solutions (Task 3) will be elaborated based on a comprehensive analysis of relevant current sectoral and cross-sectoral policies in the three study areas and a systematization and impact evaluation of these policies with respect to sustainable land use in the light of governance theory. Based on these analyses we will formulate policy c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> recommendations that will be targeted at improving sustainable land-use management of forests and agricultural land in view of the expected natural and socio-economic changes. The proposed methodological framework includes several novel approaches in each of the three research tasks as well as in closing links and feedback loops between them, including the evaluation of the effects of adapted land use practices on the provision of ecosystem goods and services and the relevant policies. Therefore, the project will contribute to (i) a better knowledge on the impact of climate changes on ecosystem processes in sensitive mountain environments, (ii) improved empirical landscape models, (iii) the assessment of feedback effects between ecological and socio-economic processes, and (iv) suggestions for innovative policy solutions with respect to sustainable land use in mountainous regions. With these deliverables, the project will significantly contribute to the mission of the Competence Center Environment and Sustainability(CCES). The project will bring together researchers of a large variety of disciplines and three different institutions of the ETH Domain, and it will strengthen synergies in research and education related to climate change and sustainability issues of mountain regions. It will also allow us to jointly exploit the potential of valuable longterm time series in the three study areas and to strengthen synergies between these traditional research centers. Research activities in two of the three study areas will have a strong link to the SwissExperiment, and they will also significantly enhance the interdisciplinary development of this CCES Research platform.
