A Literary Atlas of Europe The main focus of literary geography are the manifold interactions between real and fictional geographies. By actually mapping spaces and places in literary texts, interactive cartography becomes a powerful tool in order to re-write the history of Europe's literary heritage. Mapping literary spaces seems like a simple idea - but in fact it's a challenge for both critics and cartographers, a task which can be solved only in a genuinely interdisciplinary approach. The explicit goal is to visibly render the specific geography of literature, but in a most sensible way, by paying respect to the logic of fictional space. In order to achieve this goal visualization models for single texts as well as for huge amounts of texts (statistical surfaces) have to be developped. In both cases literary geography should be much more than mere cartographic illustration or a support to scholarly literature in which everything is already said. Quite the contrary literary maps are meant to be tools of interpretation, powerful analytical instruments. The central instrument for the exploration of literary geography has two components: a database containing fictional texts and text-related data (1) and a set of cartographic visualisations (2) which is automatically linked to the database. The database will store hundreds of texts ranging from regional to world literature with appropriate thematic, temporal and geographic attributes ("metadata"). For example, there is a distinction between settings which have a counterpart in the real world and others which have been radically transformed or are completely ficticious. In the next step, precise queries can be directed to the database in order to generate thematic maps: Are there geographic areas which are entirely undocumented in literature? How densely settled by fictional works is a particular space? How internationally is it occupied? Or is the space inscribed almost exclusively by native authors? Under which conditions (political-historical not least) does the (imagination-) space of literature contract, and under which does it expand? The geography of a single author, a group of writers, or a particular literary-historical epoch can be called up, as well as the literary geography of a minority or of an entire nation. One could also ask: Are there epoch-specific settings? The results are shown as maps, tables, or diagrams, but the maps generated are not merely statistical. At any time, the query parameters can be adjusted interactively, so that new insights can be gained through new cartographic visualisations. It is also possible to show diachronic developments, for example through animation. The major challenge regarding cartographic solutions is to develop an imprecise geography : c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> Firstly, literary settings usually do not have definite borders, hence the question is, which shape they should be given (see graphics 1/2); secondly, settings are sometimes hard to localize - in that case the visualization process calls for animation to display a setting with an uncertain location. Through the combination of the database and cartographic renderings, fictional spaces become visible. The newly generated map material thus allows a much more exact, closer description of a fictionalised space and its genesis than previously. In a final phase, literary historians interpret and comment on the cartographic representations. For the pilot version of the literary atlas three case studies will be prepared and carried out by experts in comparative literature. The studies are focussing on three completely different types of literary spaces: The Lake Lucerne and Gotthard region (alpine scenery), Nordfriesland (coast, shoreline), and Prague (urban topography). The suggested end product - an interactive literary atlas - can be described as a spatially (and no longer chronologically) organized history of Europe's literary heritage and ongoing literary production (the database can absorb additional textual material at any time). What comes in sight is the (imaginary) space of literature, which has its own dimensions, functions according to its own rules, but which is nevertheless anchored in the reality of existing spaces and places. The project is fully funded by the Gebert Rüf Stiftung, Basel, Switzerland (duration: 36 months).
