Coolant flow in nuclear fuel elements The flow in fuel rod bundles of nuclear reactors (LWRs) is investigated in two adiabatic test rids. Wire-mesh sensors, liquid film thickness sensors and tomography with cold neutrons provide high-resolution data on the coolant flow structure. The effect of funtional spacer grids is studied. There are three related experimental activities included in this project: (1) Disperse-annular flow in Boiling Water Reactors A novel sensor for liquid film thickness measurements in a two-phase flow with high time and spatial resolution is applied in an adiabatic model (CALVIN) of a fuel element Boiling Water Reactor. The test rig is located in the Laboratory of Nuclear Energy Systems at ETHZ. The sensor development was carried out within the project Novel measuring techniques for single and twophase flows (20617). The test rig represents a pair of two neigboring cooling sub-channels formed by 6 fuel rods. Main flow regime of interest is the disperse-annular gas-liquid flow found close to the upper end of fuel elements of Boiling Water Reactors. The test loop is operated with water and three different gases, which are circulated by a compressor: helium, air and C4F8. Experiments with the different gases allow studying the effect of the gas density on the dynamic flow pattern. Between helium and air, as well as between air and octofluor cyclobutane there is a density ratio of about 1:7. The density of C4F8 comes close to the one of the vapor in the reactor (ratio 1:4). The test rig is described in Damsohn & Prasser (2009), as well as in the PhD thesis of Damsohn (2011). The results are characterizing the time averaged film thickness distributions on the surface of the fuel rods and the dynamic behavior (wavy structures, droplet deposition) in the sub-channels with and without functional spacer grids (Damsohn & Prasser, 2010). The latter are commonly used to intensify heat transfer and delay dryout, which is a phenomenon limiting the power of the reactor. The optimization of functional spacer grids is a topic of great interest for the further enhancement of the efficiency of nuclear power plants. The enhancement of droplet deposition by the spacer grids was reported by Damsohn & Prasser (2011). An approach to theoretical modeling was done by coupling a RANS model of the flow in the gas core with a simplified film flow model via the shear stress dostribution on the surface of the fuel rods (Damsohn & Prasser, 2011a). The specifics of a gas-liquid two-phase flow in narrow channels was first investigated in a rectangular gap of high aspect ratio (Ito, Damsohn et al., 2011). The front and the back wall of the channel of 1.5 mm width was formed by a pair of liquid film sensors. In this way, the liquid film thickness underneath of gas bubbles ranging from few millimeters to the size of large cap bubbles and plugs was quantified for the first time. In the next step, a pair of sub-channels of a dense-triangular-lattice fuel rod bundle was set up and equipped with film sensors. The results are published by Ito, Prasser and Aritomi (2011). c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> The work on the CALVIN test rig is continued in the direction of the measurement of the liquid velocity in the film. This is done by an injection of small amounts of salt tracer into the film flowing over the surface of the liquid film thickness sensor. Feasibility was shown in frame of a master thesis, which gave the basis for the launch of a new PhD project. (2) Time-averaged film thickness measurements by means of tomography with cold neutrons The measurements with the sub-channel geometries studied at the CALVIN loop with the electrical liquid film thickness sensor were repeated at the ICON beam line of the SINQ spallation neutron source at the Paul Scherrer Institute. The beam line uses cold neutrons and is equipped with a neutron imaging system for tomography. The test channel geometry was copied using aluminum, which has a low attenuation for the neutrons. A number of tests with and without the insertion of functional spacers were repeated at the neutron beamline. The measurements were complementary: the neutron tomography grants a much higher spatial resolution in the range of 0.2 mm, but can only provide time-averaged liquid hold-up profiles in the channel, whereas the electrical sensor delivers measuring sequences with a frequency of 10 kHz, but with a spatial resolution of only 2 mm. Furthermore, the neutron tomography was able to visualize and quantify the liquid holdup in the gas core of the flow, the liquid films on the spacer grid structures including the vanes for the flow control. Besides a successful verification of the results obtained by the electrical sensor, the neutron tomography has provided useful additional insides in this way. In a second experimental campaign, the dense triangular fuel rod lattice was tested on both test facilities. This work is relevant to the development of reduced-moderation Boiling Water Reactors that have to potential for high conversion, i.e. for high rates of transformation of the non-fissile uranium isotope 238 into fissile material, which would lead to a significant enhancement of the fuel efficiency and create an alternative to classical concepts of reactors with fast neutrons. The work is continued by the construction of a non-adiabatic, that means heated test section, in which the real evaporation process in the sub-channel and its influence on the film dynamics can be investigated. (3) Cross-mixing and two-phase flow in fuel rod bundles of Pressurized Water Reactors In a adiabatic test section representing a segment of a fuel element of a Pressurized Water Reactor a pair of wire-mesh sensors with a matrix size of 64x64 was implemented. This test rig is called SUBFLOW and is located at the Paul Scherrer Institute. It is used for single-phase cross-mixing studies (Ylönen et al., 2011), as well as for gas-liquid two-phase flow measurements (Ylönen & Prasser, 2011). The bundle has the dimensions of a matrix of 4x4 subchannels. A local point-like salt tracer injection makes the turbulent cross-mixing between neighboring sub-channels accessible by the wire-mesh sensor. These experiments were carried out with and without functional spacer grids. In the two-phase region, the experiments are complementary to the ones at the CALVIN facility, since they are focused on low void fraction cases typical for boiling in PSR fuel elements. Two-phase tests revealed for the first time detailed insides into the effect of functional spacers to the structure of a two-phase flow. In a flow characterized by a wall peak of the void fraction caused by the lift force, the swirl generated by spacer vanes transports bubbles to the center of the c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> subchannel. Progressing decay of the swirl downstream of the spacer grid leads to a reversal of this process. The data provides a very sensitive basis for the validation of two-fluid CFD models.
