Experiments and instrumentation for containment flows Measuring methods are developed for an extension of the instrumentation of PANDA, a large-scale facility at PSI for studies on nuclear containment thermal hydraulics. A 1:4 downscaled facility MiniPanda was constructed for the test of the instrumentation, scaling studies and CFD code valuidation. The actual trends in reactor safety research show a wide use of CFD codes. Growing calculation power allows the application of CFD also for containment analyses. Experimental data needed for code validation have to be obtained preferably from large scale tests, minimizing the impact of scaling distortions in the assessment of the CFD models. Phenomena such as fluid (air, steam, hydrogen) stratification in the containment as well as break-up of stratification induced by negatively buoyant flow, gas transport between containment compartments, wall condensation, etc. have been identified as high-ranking phenomena playing an important role in issues directly related to the safety or to the design of future reactors. The large scale test facility PANDA is used for such experiments. The instrumentation of PANDA is difficult because of the conditions inside the facility with pressures up to 1 MPa and temperatures up to 180 rC. Additionally steam is present, that may condense. Sensors and transducers for in-situ measurements must withstand these conditions. There are few measuring principles that are applicable to such conditions. Three types of instrumentation where developed and applied for experiments on PANDA as well as on a downscaled test rig at ETHZ (MiniPanda, see below): (1) Ultrasonic time-of-flight sensors for gas composition measurements The availability of pressure and temperature resistant ultrasonic transducers capable of irradiating sound into a gaseous fluid offers the opportunity to install speed-of-sound gauges inside the vessels of the PANDA facility. The speed of sound of an ideal gas is a unique function of its adiabatic exponent, the molecular mass and its temperature. Vice versa, in binary mixtures, the gas fraction is a unique function of speed of sound and temperature. Therefore the measurement of speed of sound can serve to validate CFD simulation data when the results are converted into speed of sound distributions. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> The speed of sound is measured between pairs of transducers mounted in a certain distance from each other (Fig. 1). An array of sensors was arranged in the drywell vessel of the containment model PANDA. The sensors are activated in a successive order. In this way, a sampling of the gas composition was carried out in experiments on the formation and erosion of hydrogen layers in the containment. The hydrogen was substituted by helium as a model fluid for safety reasons. The results were validated by a comparison with the readings of a mass spectrometer connected to a sampling system. (2) Robust pulsed heater anemometers for small velocities in containment flows For the measurement of gas velocities, which are often rather small (0 - 0.3 m/s) in the containment atmosphere, conventional robust vane anemometers do not have a sufficiently small lower measuring limit. Velocity measurement techniques (LDA, PIV, LIF) are often inapplicable because of a lack of optical access into the areas of interest; or because of the unknown local gas composition fraction (hot-film/wire anemometry). Other techniques are not sensitive enough (vane wheel anemometers) to detect low velocities. For this reason, a low cost calorimetric sensor was designed to serve as a local velocity transducer. The sensor consists of a tube with heater grids spanned over the cross-section at both ends, while in the center a fast thermocouple is mounted. A second version has one heater in the center and two thermoresistive elements (thermistors) at both ends. Portions of hot air produced by pulsing the heater serve as a tracer and are moved by the surrounding gas flow to the thermocouple or away from it. By driving the heaters subsequently, the direction of the flow is gained too. (3) Thermoresistive mesh-sensors for the measurement of two-dimensional temperature fields Mesh sensor technology was used to create large two-dimensional arrays of thermoresistive elements for the measurement of temperature fields (Fig. 2). The thermistors represent temperaturedependent resistive elements the conductance of which is read out by a mesh-sensor signal acquisition system. A calibration is performed by exposing the array to air of a well-defined temperature and sampling the raw data. Individual calibration curves for each thermistor have to be applied. The time resolution is determined by the thermal inertia of the thermoresistive elements, which is in the range of 0.2 - 0.7 s, with a dependency from the gas velocity and the type of thermistor used. The sampling can potentially be done with frequencies of up to several kHz. In own experiments, an oversampling by 200 Hz was chosen, which allows for an averaging of several individual samples in order to decrease signal noise. All mentioned types of instrumentation were tested in a small-scale model of the drywell vessels of the large PANDA facility, which was built in the Laboratory of Nuclear Energy Systems at ETHZ (Fig. 3). The test rig has a scale of 1:4 with regard to PANDA and is called MiniPanda. It consists of two vertical cylindrical vessels (1 m diameter, 2 m heigh), connected by a horizontal pipe. Both vessels as well as the interconnecting pipe were equipped with thermoresistive meshsensors. In the interconnecting pipe, a set of four pulsed heater anemometers was mounted. An ultrasonic gas composition measuring system was installed in one of the vessels. Katkarometers and thermocouples were used for comparison. The use of MiniPanda went beyond the test of instrumentation. In two separate test series, data suitable for CFD code validation applied to containment flows were obtained. The fist series c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> consisted in generic air ingress scenarios, where one vessel was filled with helium, the other one with heated air. A sudden removal of a blockage plate in the interconnecting pipe started a gravity driven exchange of air and helium. The transient concentration and temperature distributions were recorded (Fig. 4). In the interconnecting pipe, a stratified counter-current flow was present, in the vessels, plumes of rising helium and descending air were formed. A second series dealt with the erosion of a stable density stratification by an impacting jet. Such phenomena are found in containments of Light Water Reactors, when stable hydrogen accumulations in the top region of the containment vessel are diluted by gas jets arriving from below, e.g. from the location of the break in the reactor circuit. The data was used for scaling studies by comparison with similar experiments at PANDA and for the validation of commercial CFD codes. In 2012, a number of MiniPanda experiments were selected for a CFD code benchmark, which is coordinated in cooperation with the laboratory for Nuclear Waste Disposal and Reactor Safety (IEK-6) of the Research Center Jülich and the (http://www.fz-juelich.de/iek/iek-6/DE/aktuelles/Meldungen/Dokum 08-24-CFD-Code_Benchmark.html). Results will be presented on the next meeting of the German CFD Research Alliance (http://cfd.grs.de/index.html) on March 6-7, 2013.
