Landscape Theodor (1810U1893) and Otto (1844U1906) Froebel U Gardeners and Plant Breeders in Zurich. The significance of their work for the development of Swiss landscape architecture in the 19th and 20th centuries. Theodor (1810U1893) and Otto (1844U1906) Froebel belong to some of the most important Swiss garden designers of the 19th century and have made a significant contribution to the emergence of Swiss landscape architecture in the 19th and 20th centuries with their multifaceted oeuvre. Theodor (1810U1893) and Otto (1844U1906) Froebel belong to some of the most important Swiss garden designers of the 19th century and have made a significant contribution to the emergence of Swiss landscape architecture in the 19th and 20th centuries with their multifaceted oeuvre. Their designs drew from their knowledge as gardeners: They ran a nursery with its own plant breeding program, which under Otto Froebel became one of the most important in Switzerland, gaining them international prestige, and brought their fascination for the biodiversity of the plant world as well as their design and breeding experience into their work. Typically for the 19th century, the direct influence of gardening is readable in their designs. Theodor Froebel, a student of Lenné, and especially his son Otto built a number of private and public projects throughout Switzerland in the mixed style of landscape gardens of the second half of the 19th century. Their projects influence the appearance of Zurich to this day, from its lakeside parks to Rieter Park. They stand for the blossoming of bourgeois garden design in the context of industrialization and burgeoning cities. Theodor und Otto Froebel continually expanded the inventory of their nursery with a number of new varieties of plants, both useful as well as decorative types. Their firm was known throughout Europe as an important station in the training of successive generations of garden designers and plant breeders who worked well into the modern era of the 20th century. The research builds on past and ongoing research on the history and theory of Swiss landscape architecture at the Institute of Landscape Architecture of ETH Zurich. An examination of the work of Theodor und Otto Froebel can contribute to closing the large knowledge gap in Swiss garden culture of the 19th century. Here the central question is the interplay between plant breeding and trade on the one hand and garden design on the other. Based on carefully chosen examples, the research should also put the work of the protagonists in the background of the times as well as in the context of Swiss garden culture.
