Political Determinants of Environmental Commitment and Performance We focus on environmental performance (across a range of indicators of pollution) and environmental commitments (such as multilateral environmental treaties) and relate them to differences in domestic variables and interaction with the international system. A large body of research has focused on the environmental consequences of economic growth. That research has produced insights into the trajectories of a range of pollution parameters (e.g. sulfur dioxide, household waste, CO2) as economies develop over time. Most of this research does not pay attention to effects of political variables on environmental performance. Those few authors who include political variables employ them in the form of simplistic control variables (notably, democracy/no-democracy). The empirical results for these control variables are usually ambiguous and are not discussed in detail. Neither are they linked to a coherent theory about why and how political/institutional variables impact on environmental performance. Our research fills this gap by systematically exploring the political determinants of environmental performance. In particular, we focus on environmental performance across a range of indicators of pollution and other forms of environmental degradation and relate these indicators to differences in levels and forms of de controlling for the influences of other variables that are mocracy and other political variables U standard in so called Kuznets-curve research in economics. The project team initially concentrated on developing the theoretical foundations for explaining why democracy is likely to have a positive effect on both the demand for and supply of public goods. We argue that democracies adopt and implement stricter environmental policies relative to non-democracies because democratic leaders, lacking sufficient resources to reward their supporters with high levels of private goods, can only ensure their political survival (accountability) by providing relatively high levels of public goods (responsiveness). Moreover, democratic political systems by offering a higher degree of civil liberties, such as freedom of speech, press, and association, enhance transparency and domestic audience costs which further increase both the responsiveness and accountability of democratic governments. The theory was then tested by focusing on the provision of one important type of public goods, namely environmental quality. The results indeed confirm that democracy tends to improve environmental quality at the national level. The research team then turned to the question whether globalization enhances or undermines the positive effect democracy has on the environment. Focusing first on developing countries the team showed that globalization defined in terms of international political integration, in particular membership in international organizations (IGOs), enhances the environmental quality of those countries because it can provide the resources and technology that less developed countries otherwise lack. Furthermore, democratic institutions seem to play a significant role in mediating the positive effect of the international system on a countrySs environmental quality. Consequently, this part of the research project suggests that developing countries do not need to become rich before they can take better care of their environment as it was previously advocated in both academic and policy debates. The research team has also examined the implications of globalization for transboundary public goods provision, focusing on international river management, climate change, and global environmental commitments more generally. These are challenges of globalization arising from the need c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> to jointly solve problems that extend beyond national boundaries and thus require international cooperation. Regarding transboundary environmental problems the team has shown that democratic country dyads are more likely to cooperate in solving these kinds of problems relative to non-democratic or mixed dyads even in cases of severe problems and high mitigation costs, such as water pollution problems in international river systems. Finally the project has explored the implications of globalization and democracy for what Nicholas Stern has termed the biggest market failure the world has ever seen , namely climate change, a policy problem that has become virtually a symbol of globalization (Spaceship Earth). The results of this research show that the effect of democracy on levels of political commitment to climate change mitigation (policy output) is positive. In contrast, the effect on policy outcomes, measured in terms of emission levels and trends, is ambiguous. These results demonstrate that the democracy effect has up to this point in time not been able to override countervailing forces that emanate from the free-rider problem, discounting of future benefits of climate change mitigation, and economic factors that cut against efforts to reduce emissions. Even though democracies have obviously had a slow start in moving from paper (policy output) to practice (policy outcomes), particularly in the transportation sector, we observe some encouraging signs. References Bernauer, Thomas and Vally Koubi (2008) Effects of Political Institutions on Air Quality, Ecological Economics (forthcoming in print), available online at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2008.09.003. Michelle Baettig and Thomas Bernauer (2009) National Institutions and Global Public Goods: are Democracies more Cooperative in Climate Change Policy? International Organization 63/2 (forthcoming). Available at: http://www.ib.ethz.ch/docs until publication. Bernauer, Thomas and Patrick Kuhn (2010) Is There an Environmental Version of the Kantian Peace? Insights from water pollution in Europe, European Journal of International Relations (forthcoming). Available at: http://www.ib.ethz.ch/docs until publication. Working papers Bernauer, Thomas, Anna Kalbhenn, Vally Koubi, and Gabi Ruoff (2009) A Comparison of International and Domestic Sources of Global Governance Dynamics , NCCR Working Paper 30, Available at: http://www.nccr-democracy.uzh.ch/publications Kalbhenn, Anna (2009) A River Runs Through It. Democracy, International Interlinkages and Cooperation over Shared Resources , NCCR Working Paper 32, Available at: http://www.nccrdemocracy.uzh.ch/publications Ruoff, Gabriele (2009) Grow Rich and Clean Up Later? Joint Effects of International Integration and Democracy on Environmental Performance, NCCR Working Paper 33, Available at: http://www.nccr-democracy.uzh.ch/publications c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3>
