Modeling of L-L systems in stirred tanks with constant and variable viscosity Modeling and experiments are used for description of heterophse stirred tanks. Hydrodynamic interactions are obtained from CFD and droplet size distribution is described by population balances. Suspension polymerization is chosen as a representative system with variable viscosity and surface tens Suspension polymerization is a heterogeneous process involving reaction in an aqueous dispersion of micron-size monomer droplets. During the reaction, the initial liquid-liquid dispersion is transformed into solid-liquid dispersion: the size distribution of the initial droplets is therefore crucial to define the quality of the final polymer. The experimental part of the project will be focused on the characterization of liquid-liquid dispersions in stirred tanks, i.e. under high shear. In particular, the average energy introduced in the systems will be evaluated by torque measurements while the rheological properties of the resulting suspensions will be estimated by off-line experiments. Different light scattering techniques will be extensively applied to measure the size distribution of the particles after the reaction and surface tension measurements will be used to evaluate the amount of adsorbed emulsifiers, key ingredients to control the colloidal stability of the system. As final aim of this part of the project, a collection of experimental results based on systems of industrial interest and suitable to check the prediction ability of the different models described below will be produced. The modeling of these systems will be based on multidimensional population balances, to be solved accounting for the operative flow field, i.e. in connection to suitable CFD reconstruction of the vessel flow conditions. Different modelling approaches will be considered, ranging from purely deterministic to mixed stochastic-deterministic methods, in order to identify modelling tools of practical use. In particular, the complex physical behaviour shown by unstable dispersions of nanoparticles at high volume fractions will be explored. The different models will be validated by comparative evaluation with literature models and by comparison with experimental data. Literature: -Andersson, R. and B. Andersson (2006). On the breakup of fluid particles in turbulent flows. Aiche Journal 52(6): 2020-2030. -Laakkonen, M., V. Alopaeus, et al. (2006). Validation of bubble breakage, coalescence and mass transfer models for gas-liquid dispersion in agitated vessel. Chemical Engineering Science 61(1): 218-228. -Petitti, M., A. Nasuti, et al. (2010). Bubble Size Distribution Modeling in Stirred Gas-Liquid Reactors with QMOM Augmented by a New Correction Algorithm. Aiche Journal 56(1): 36-53.
