CMS ECAL beam test RD The CMS electromagnetic calorimeter will consist of 100000 crystals, avalanche photodiodes and associated electronics operating in a challenging environment (4T field, 25 ns between bunches, radiation doses of a few Mrad/year, extremely difficult access for maintenance). Furthermore, the temperature coefficient of the crystals and of the APD imply that the temperature must be stabilised to 0.1 deg C. Although several large crystal calorimeters have been built in the past, none of them has had to face the challenges of speed, radiation resistance and size that an LHC calorimeter will face. Thus, although much is known about the construction and operation of crystal calorimeters, significant R&D has to be continued over the next years to design the calorimeter, along with first pre-production studies. These tasks can be grouped as follows: - Proof-of-principle: It has to be demonstrated that a large scale Lead Tungstate detector shows the expected performance, and that its running environment can be controlled sufficiently to assure a stable operation. - Crystal R&D: the ability to produce in a reproducible way crystals capable of meeting the requirements of a LHC detector must be demonstrated. This also requires a sufficient understanding of the scintillation and radiation damage mechanisms in Lead Tungstate. Adequate and consistent radiation resistance of Lead Tungstate crystals must be demonstrated to ensure stable, reliable operation. - Production R&D: the techniques required to mass produce large crystals of the required optical and mechanical quality at reasonable costs must be developed. - Calorimeter construction R&D: the techniques to construct the calorimeter system must be developed. - Readout: the light produced in the crystals has to be read out in a high magnetic field and high radiation environment. In addition, the readout has to suit the short bunch crossing time (25 ns) of the LHC. All these questions have already received some answers over the last three years, but a complete, satisfactory performance has still to be achieved. In order to establish the final technical design specifications of a high precision, high speed crystal calorimeter various aspects have to be addressed. These issues are outlined below and they will be studied in collaboration with several institutions participating in the CMS experiment. While it is reasonable to expect advances in technology during the coming years, prior to full-scale production a working solution must be demonstrated for all of these components. Tests in the H4 beam line at the CERN SPS will continue, besides on the prototype under construction, also on the matrix already used in 1996 with a traditional , charge integrating readout. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> Beam tests will be carried out between april and september, first with emphasis on the monitoring systems: a red LED proved to be satisfactory last year, but we want to add a green LED; work to understand the laser monitoring system will be given priority since speckling seems to cause instabilities of the order of 2%, much to high to satisfy our needs. We then intend to study the effect of crystal uniformisation on the energy resolution, to use new crystals as they become available, continue the tests of flash ADC compared to charge ADCs and to provide a test bed for the development of the trigger system. Once an integrated prototype becomes available, we will study it in details to optimize cooling, shielding, electronics layout, monitoring systems and overall performances. The tight mechanical tolerances will also allow us to check our Monte Carlo simulations regarding in particular the effect of dead spaces on resolution.
