Signaling Trustworthiness in Laboratory and Field Experiments The goal of the research project is to conduct a series of laboratory and field experiments in order to empirically test the implications of signaling theory. The interested scientific community is in sociology, social psychology, and economics. The goal of the research project is to conduct a series of laboratory and field experiments in order to empirically test the implications of signaling theory. Signaling theory focuses on agentsS display of idiosyncratic characteristics and their behavior which allow one to infer agentsS underlying preferences and constraints in social interactions. The theory has gained recognition in most disciplines in the social and behavioral sciences and has been widely applied to explain seemingly irrational human behavior. Signals can convey information about wealth, status, ability, trustworthiness, etc. From a game theoretic perspective signals may be the only truthful means of communication in strategic interactions with asymmetric information. Under certain condition, signaling behavior allows agents to discriminate between different types of senders choosing those among them with whom it is most beneficial to interact. Intrigued by the idea that signals can convey information about agentsS structural constraints in trust relations, we develop a game theoretic model that formalizes such interactions. In a series of laboratory and field experiments we empirically test hypotheses derived from our model. In the first laboratory experiment we will test the implications of our model systematically. The focus of this experiment is on the correspondence of empirical results with game theoretic predictions as two parameters of interest are varied. In the second laboratory experiment we test contextSs relevance. Subjects will be told a cover story describing an interaction situation from a real world context. In one condition, the costly investment will be presented to subjects as self advertisement and in another as an inefficient gift. Signals, as such, are inefficient as they entail costs for the sender and do not benefit the receiver. From a game theoretic perspective, the efficiency of a signal does not matter. In the last laboratory experiment we test whether the signalsS efficiency matters empirically. Finally, we conduct an online field experiment. Online markets are characterized by a high number of one-time interactions between anonymous buyers and sellers. A possibility for market entrants to establish trustworthiness is to invest in costly signals, thereby reducing short term incentives to behave opportunistically. Experiments and results are to be described in articles that will be submitted to international peerreviewed journals and will be presented at conferences and other scientific meetings. The interested scientific community is in sociology, social psychology, and economics.
