Human Childbirth Simulator This project is about studying and modeling human physiology in connection with the childbirth process. The first goal is to create a simulator of childbirth that provides a multimodal feedback as available at real births. Secondly mathematical models of human physiology shall improve the simulator. Motivation There are approximately 73 000 live births per year in Switzerland. Most of those occur without a problem. However, a number of modern trends are making it more difficult to introduce doctors to the field of obstetrics. The average weight and size of the fetus at time of birth is increasing, which can make childbirth physically impossible. Also, cerebral palsy incidence of 0.3% is mainly attributed to fetal hypoxia, a complication of late pregnancy and childbirth. To avoid problems, the number of diagnoses of fetal distress has risen and consequently also the number of cesarean sections. Today almost every fourth childbirth is done by cesarean section, which is a difficult operative procedure. Is this high number because of lack of experience, or just playing it safe? Medical education in the area of childbirth is primarily focused on passing theoretical knowledge to students since certain complications are rare. Learning by doing is not so common in medical practice. Childbirth is a difficult process, it is difficult for the mother and the child. Childbirth is also a time-critical process and is demanding swift and correct situation assessment and responses in case of complications. That is why training is essential. Simulators present a significant improvement in training of young obstetricians. Using virtual reality training stations with lifelike visual, acoustic, tactile, and kinesthetic feedback would provide working professionals and students with a hands-on experience with medical procedures. Although childbirth is essentially a mechanical process, its progress is dictated above all by physiological responses of the mother and fetus, for instance fetal heart rate measured by cardiotocogram (CTG). The ability to act and receive information in a simulator the same way as in a real delivery room makes it easier to transfer the experience from one to the other. Interpretation of various signals that an obstetrician is receiving during childbirth requires knowledge and experience. Having experts demonstrate their skills in a controlled environment helps us to understand their decisions and thus give external stimuli a proper weighing. This process is taking place every time a decision of action is to be made. To create this controlled environment, a mathematical model of the childbirth process is needed. It gives us freedom to simulate not only observed cases and also helps us to better understand the childbirth process. The mathematical model and level of detail can be adjusted in order to give a more accurate feedback, based on expertsS opinions, and thus also help us understand the mechanisms responsible for such feedback. Project Goals The human body is a very complicated system. This project is about studying and modeling human physiology in connection with the childbirth process. The first goal is to create a simulator of childbirth that provides a multimodal feedback as available at real births. Afterwards, we will study mathematical models of human physiology that can make the simulation more realistic, and in the long run, improve our understanding of the process. The simulator Today there is a gap between the childbirth experience in the simulator and the real childbirth. We are making a step further toward making the simulation of childbirth more realistic. At our lab we c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> are equipping a Virtual Delivery Room , where the simulations will take place. Besides an interactive phantom of mother and child, which is a haptic interface, we are creating the surroundings for the phantom as well. Thus doctors are in a familiar environment when using the simulator, and can use the equipment as they would in reality. This makes it easier to transfer the experience to the real delivery. The simulator thus includes haptic feedback, instrument readouts, and administering drugs. With the simulator we can display also some additional information like position of fetal head inside the birth canal, or hints to the obstetrician in case of training. Haptic interface gives the obstetrician a force and position feedback. A mathematical model of physiology is used to generate instrument readouts. Drugs are administered in order to reduce pain, enhance contractions or boost the fetus oxygen supply. Also other medical instruments can be added in order to make the simulation more complete. Mathematical model The Virtual Delivery Room is the interface of our childbirth model. The information carried to the interface is grouped by character into three groups and for each of those we developed a submodel that provides required information. A mechanical model, i.e. a haptic interface, is based on the geometric model of the birth canal and the mathematical model of elastic forces produced by the soft tissue and hard pelvis on the fetal head. The physiology model provides feedback to the electronic equipment used, like CTG, blood pressure meter, pulse oxymeter, etc. It thus describes cardiovascular system, respiratory system, drug dynamics, substance exchange across the placenta, uterus contraction dynamics, and physiology - mechanics interaction. The mind model describes global regulation mechanisms, e.g. stress response, fatigue, and other psychology factors. The approach using mathematical models for childbirth simulation gives us an opportunity to simulate scenarios and complications that weren't measured. It also makes it easy to add variability to simulations behavior.
