Genomic divergence in plants: exploring the consequences of ecological adaptation for plant divergence and speciation This project explores the genetic basis of ecological adaptation and its consequences for divergence in two plant study systems, an evolutionary young and an older system, that differ in their level of ecological and genomic divergence. Studies of adaptation and speciation in plants are currently experiencing a major revolution. First, new sequencing technologies and conceptual advances open the doors to truly genome-wide analyses of adaptation, selection and genomic divergence in natural populations. Second, the concept of ecological speciation puts ecological adaptation into the spotlight of speciation research because it provides a direct link between ecological adaptation, divergent selection and speciation, and because it implies that speciation can occur over ecological time scales. To date, however, relevant examples of ecological speciation are scarce and empirical data on the genetic basis of the process is largely lacking. This project sets out to explore the genetic basis of ecological adaptation and its consequences for genome-wide divergence in two plant study systems, an evolutionary young and an older system. The first study system is wild carnation, Dianthus sylvestris, where natural populations occur over a large altitudinal gradient in the Alps and show strong phenotypic divergence in the absence of neutral genetic divergence. This pattern suggests that divergent natural selection underlies phenotypic divergence and has led to ecological adaptation. I propose to explore the association between ecological adaptation and incipient genomic divergence in Dianthus. The second study system includes two closely related Silene species, S. latifolia and S. dioica. These species show incomplete morphological, ecological and reproductive isolation and often hybridize upon secondary contact, yet remain distinct outside of contact zones. I propose to explore the contribution of ecological adaptation to present day reproductive isolation and genomic divergence between these two species. To assess genomic divergence between high and low altitude populations of D. sylvestris, as well as between S. latifolia and S. dioica, we will use RAD sequencing, a recently developed method that uses next-generation sequencing (NGS) to assess nucleotide variation at a genome-wide scale. Genomic regions associated with ecological adaptation will be identified using a combination of classical ecological transplant experiments and high-density QTL mapping in experimental populations. This genotyping information will be further used to study the frequency and genomic position of intrinsic reproductive barriers (incompatibilities). Together, these results may provide a novel perspective on the associations between ecological adaptation, divergent selection and speciation in plants and provide a test of the ecological speciation scenario.
