Disorder-induced phases in quantum magnets Chemical substitution is used to introduce bond randomness into low- dimensional quantum magnets, seeking to stabilize exotic quantum phases such as Bose and Mott glasses, Random Single phase and chiral liquids. Measurements are performed using neutron scattering and bulk techniques. In the frame of this project the properties of a set of low dimensional spin S=1/2 systems are studied. All systems consist of copper chloride embedded in an organic material. The copper cations carry the spin. Different chains and two-dimensional structures are formed by the organic materials, so that the interaction between the spins is one- or two-dimensional. Superexchange via the chlorine anions is the main exchange mechanism, therefore, the random bond substitution is realized by the substitution of chlorine anions by bromine anions. The samples show a singlet ground states and a triplet excitation a quasi boson, which is separated by a gap from the ground state. By applying a magnetic field this gap is overcome by the Zeeman energy at a critical field Hc and undergoes a Bose-Einstein condensation. From this critical field the triplet density is driven by the applied field, damped by the hard core repulsive forces between the quasiparticles. The goal of this project is to introduce new phases by random bond disorder in these materials. While the triplets are mobile in the Bose-Einstein condensate so that they can hop between the positions, the triplet mobility gets constricted due to bond disorder. This behavior can help to stabilize new phases between the ground state and the elicited BEC state (see [1] and references therein). The properties of these new materials are investigated by heat capacity and magnetization measurements to identify interesting temperature and field ranges for neutron scattering experiments. One of the materials investigated is a four leg spin ladder Sulfolane-Cu2Cl4 [2] where where geometric frustration forces the magnon dispersion minimum to an incommensurate wavevector. In magnetic fields exceeding Hc = 3.75T a condensation of magnons produces an incommensurate phase with spontaneous 3D long-range helimagnetic order of spin components transverse to the applied felds with propagation vector (0.78,0,0.48). To investigate the effect of disorder on this field induced phase transition, we prepared samples with up to 5% Br content. The key finding is that Br substitution already at very low concentrations (x) destroys the thermodynamic field-induced transition completely. In magnetic susceptibility and heat capacity curves at all temperatures, the sharp peak seen for x = 0%, is replaced by a broad feature at x = 1%, and altogether absent for x = 3.5%, see Graphics 1. We invoke a novel, random frustration mechanism to account for such behavior. Disorder is expected to create random phase shifts in the individual incommensurate 1D spin ladders, which cause interchain interactions average out to zero as illustrated in the inset to Graphics 1. Such disorder mechanism has remained theoretically unexplored in context of Bose Glasses and our future work is aimed towards producing high quality neutron scattering results and stimulating theoretical progress. A two-dimensional test material we have chosen is a well studied Heisenberg quantum magnet piperazinium hexachlorodicuprate (PHCC) [3]. Similarly, the nonmagnetic spin liquid ground state is separated from the magnetic excited state by spin gap of 1 meV. Upon gap closing at critical field ~ Hc = 7.5T magnons condense to form an ordered ground state with magnetic moments pointing perpendicular to external field. In PHCC chemically induced exchange disorder has less drama- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> tic effect. Phase transition to ordered state survives up to 10% of Br disorder where a structural transition relieves the chemical pressure. Up to the limiting concentration we observe monotonous increase of critical field and reduction of critical temperature, see Graphics 2. The phase boundary critical exponent (phi) increases from mean field value in agreement with theoretical predictions [4,5]. At the same time inelastic neutron scattering experiments reveal that the long-lived magnons of pure PHCC acquire a considerable intrinsic width in disordered samples. Suprisingly, the order parameter critical exponent probed by neutron diffraction shows no sensitivity to disorder although the order parameter itself aquires a history dependence. Future work focuses on spin dynamics in disordered PHCC over the full Brillouin zone and on microscopic understanding of the order parameter hysteresis. .[1] R. Yu, S. Haas, and T. Roscilde, Europhys. Lett., 89, 10009 (2010) .[2] M. Fujisawa, Ph.D. thesis, Tokyo Institute of Technology (2006) .[3] M. B. Stone et al. New Journal of Physics 9, 31 (2007). .[4] Fisher et al. Phys. Rev. B 40, 546 (1989) .[5] P. B. Weichman and R. Mukhopadhyay, Phys. Rev. B 77, 214516 (2008).
