Preparation and functionalization of porous polymeric monoliths by Reactive Gelation Porous polymeric monoliths for HPLC usage can be produced by the Reactive Gelation process. By functionalisation of the monoliths their surface properties can be varied. Macroporous polymeric supports are very attractive in combinatorial chemistry, solid phase synthesis and in chromatography for separating huge molecules like peptides or proteins. Therefore, the interest in those materials and the corresponding synthesis routes is continuously increasing. Typically macroporous polymer networks are produced by suspension polymerization in presence of a porogen. A variety of porous structures can be obtained by changing the variables of the synthesis (i.e. the kind of porogen, amount of crosslinker and porogen, initiator concentration or polymerization temperature). But it is very difficult to predict the pore size distribution of the final material. An alternative route to synthesize polymeric macroporous materials is the reactive gelation process. In this procedure the production of the porous material is split into well-defined steps. The first step is the preparation of monodisperse crosslinked latex particles by emulsion polymerization. The second step is the swelling of the particles with a mixture of monomer, crosslinker and initiator. After this the swollen latex particles are gelated by addition of salt and the porous structure is created. After the gelation the monomer in the particles is post-polymerized and binds the particles together by chemical covalent bonds. As a result a monolith is obtained, where the gel fractal structure has been frozen and the pore structure can be controlled. The reactive gelation step can also be carried out under shear, i.e. stirred conditions. This does not result in a gel and subsequently a monolith, but instead in the formation of clusters which can then be hardened. If the pore size of these clusters is large enough, this can result in a chromatographic behaviour similar to monoliths, so-called perfusive flow.
