M3 Lab - Multi-Modal Motion Synthesis Laboratory The goal of the M3 Lab is the investigation of the neurological and biomechanical principles of human motor learning and motor control. The Lab is intended to be applied for motor learning, movement optimization, rehabilitation, sports simulation and motivation studies MOTIVATION: The goal of the M3 Lab is the investigation of the neurological and biomechanical principles of human motor learning and motor control. This is performed by applying multi-modal and usercooperative techniques to patients with movement disorders (rehabilitation research) and to healthy subjects (basic motor research, sports, entertainment). Multi-modal means that the subject is supplied with a maximum amount of information by exploiting visual, acoustical, tactile, and kinaesthetic sensor and actor channels. Cooperative means that the technical system takes into account the subjectSs efforts and intention rather than imposing an inflexible strategy. Multi-modality and cooperative control have the potential to improve the motor learning effects in motor therapies as well as movement training applications. SYSTEM SETUP: The motion synthesis lab will merge a variety of different display and recording technologies in order to meet the requirements for a multi-modal cooperative system. Visual Display: Three screens will surround the viewer and display 3D visual information. Since loudspeakers are placed behind the screens, this has serious implications for the projection method and setup (still in planning). Sound Display: An IOSONO sound system will be used to achieve superior sound quality. With the method of the wave field synthesis, virtual sound sources can be generated inside and outside the sound room. This requires a closed ring of speakers. This ring will be placed in the height of about 1,50m from the ground (ear level). At the back side a door-like frame has to be constructed so that the user has an easy access to the interior. The speakers have to be placed very close to the screen to minimize losses due to sonic absorptions and to maximize the spatial accuracy of the virtual sound source locations. Haptic Display, Novel Cable Robot System: A wire robot will be used as a haptic interface integrated in our multi-modal motion synthesis lab. The design of the robot is optimized in order to fulfil a maximal number of possible movement tasks. Fig. 3 shows the basic idea: a cubic support frame (SF) serves as a basis. Active modules (Ai) are fixed on this frame and generate forces that interact with an end-effector (EE) through cables. The end-effector can be an object, e.g. a handle, grasped by the user, or the user himself is connected to the wires via appropriate mechanical adapters. The wires can change their lengths and perhaps their origins. Position and force sensors are required to control the robot. The number of actuators nA can vary, depending on the application and the number of actuated degrees of freedom (n=nA-1). The use of the robot for different movement tasks requires a detailed analysis of the workspace as the wires must not interfere with the userSs movement. Furthermore, investigations on the stability for the relevant end-effectors and their possible positions have to be made. If the number of actuators exceeds n+1, i.e. the system is statically over-determined, additional constraints have to be found (such as minimum and maximum permissible cable tensions). The hard- and software requirements for such a robot comprise high-potential electric motors, low friction drives, which are free from backlash, high precision force and motion sensors, fast data processing and special force control algorithms. The latter refers to user-cooperative techniques which take into consideration the userSs intention and efforts rather than imposing any predefined movement. Motion Tracking System: For fast motion tracking an optical system will be used. The cameras c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> will be placed in about 4 m height over ground. Interference with projection screens has to be avoided.
