first principles simulations of the electron dynamics in dye sensitized solar cells Develop new computer simulation tools and protocols based on density functional theory for the simulation of electron transfer processes at the active interface in dye sensitized solar cells. One of the grand challenges for our society is to provide clean energy for the future. Among the viable technologies to reduce our dependency on fossil fuels are solar cells. Experimental research and engineering is employing advanced techniques of materials science, chemistry and physics to design new and improved devices. In these systems key processes take place at complex interfaces. Optimizing device performance requires a detailed understanding of the systemSs chemistry and physics. In dye sensitized solar cells (DSSC), the in electron injection step is a crucial event. Here, I propose to develop new computer simulation tools and protocols based on density functional theory, specifically targeted at this step. I will build this research on my extensive experience in the fields of modeling and simulation. This work will extend our past research which allowed us to study explicit atomistic models of DSSC for key processes of the N3 dye on the anatase(101) surface, in contact with an electrolyte based on acetonitrile and iodide/triiodide. Our particular fo cus will be twoUfold: 1) quantitative prediction of the UV/VIS spectra of species in their complex environment, 2) and non-adiabatic ab initio molecular dynamics simulations of electron transfer processes at the interface. The unique aspect of our proposal is that we aim to do these calculations based on hybrid density functionals, and for realistic model systems of actual high performance DSSCs. The results of this research will be valuable for DSSC development, and readily extend to other interfacial systems. The calculation of UV/VIS spectra and time dependent electronic dynamics, will be of interest to a broad community of researchers, both experimental and theoretical, as this is a major experimental probe of these and other interfacial systems.
