Characterization of the mechanical properties of soft biological tissues Novel experimental techniques are developped for determining the mechanical behaviour of soft biological tissues. In-vivo and in-vitro measurements are performed on animal and human organs. Constitutive models are derived from the experiments using continuum mechanics theories. The mechanical characterization of soft biological tissues is essential to a number of medical applications, such as surgery planning, surgical training deploying virtual reality based simulators, or diagnosis. Quantitative data sets are available on the in-vivo mechanical properties of soft tissues in animal organs, but very limited data are available on the behavior of soft tissues associated with human organs. This deficiency is primarily due to the severe technical and ethical problems related to the experiments. In this work two new techniques are presented for soft tissueSs mechanical testing, that were designed to fulfill the requirements for in-vivo measurements on human organs during open surgery: the aspiration test and the dynamic torsion test. In the aspiration test (Figure 1) relatively large local tissue deformations are imposed and the time dependent behavior of the tissue can be observed. The experiment is characterized by well defined kinematic and static boundary conditions and the time required for each measurement is very short (of the order of 20 seconds). This device has been used already for the in-vivo characterization of the mechanical behavior of human organs during open surgery. In the dynamic torsion test (Figure 2) the soft tissue is made part of a vibrating system. The complex shear modulus of the soft tissue is determined from the transfer function of the system. Measurements are performed at frequencies ranging from 1 to 10 kHz. This non-destructive technique can be applied for in-vivo measurements. The aspiration experiment consists of a tube in which the internal pressure can be controlled according to a desired pressure law. The experimental set-up has been designed for in-vivo applications addressing issues associated with: safety, sterilizability, space limitation and a short data acquisition cycle time. The investigation is performed by (i) gently pushing the tube against the tissue to ensure a good initial contact, (ii) creating a (time variable and prescribed) vacuum inside the tube so that the tissue is sucked in through a smooth edged aspiration hole (diameter of 10 mm). Assuming the tissue to be isotropic and homogeneous in the small portion under deformation, a complete description of the deformed tissue can be given by simply monitoring the side-view profile of the tissue during its deformation. An accurate model for the tissue under consideration can be provided by a 3-D model based upon a continuum mechanics approach. We consider the material as a homogeneous and isotropic continuum, showing a quasi-linear viscoelastic behavior and due to the high water content, as nearly incompressible. Hyperelastic materials are usually described in terms of a strain energy potential U which defines the energy stored in the material as a function of the strain. We use the so called reduced polynomial form. The experiment is simulated by an axisymmetric finite element (FE) model (Figure 3). Axisymmetric hybrid triangles are used with linear pressure and quadratic displacement formulation. The overall dimensions of the model are selected in order to minimize the influence of the boundary conditions at the bottom (A-B) and at the side (B-C) on the displacement of the aspirated tissue bubble. The contact between the tissue and the device (C-D) is modeled as rigid-deformable contact with sliding. The material parameters are determined by an optimization procedure by minimizing the discrepancy between the measurements and the simulations, by c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> changing the mechanical parameters of the material. A physical description of the mechanical behavior described by the continuum mechanics model is given by extrapolating from the general constitutive model, valid for any condition of loading, the uniaxial tensile behavior of the tissue. We plot the stress-stretch relation we would obtain by applying an instantaneous nominal uniaxial stress T and measuring the stretch (Figure 4). In order to analyze the time dependency of the mechanical properties, we linearize the constitutive model for small deformations and plot the tensile relaxation function E(t) (Figure 5). Soft tissues are also characterized by means of a dynamic testing method, in which the tissue sample is made a part of a vibrating system, Figure 2. A rod of circular cross-section is excited at its torsional eigenfrequencies (from 1 kHz to 10 kHz) by an electromagnetic transducer (which represents the actuator as well as the sensor). Only the free end of the rod is laid against the soft tissue. The soft tissue sample lies on a balance, so that the contact force can be monitored. The damping characteristics of the vibrating system and the resonance frequency are inferred from the control variables of a phase stabilization loop. Due to the contact with the soft tissue, changes occur in the dynamic properties of the torsional oscillator: the Q-Factor is reduced and the resonance frequency is shifted. From the differences between a calibration run (without soft tissue contact) and a measurement with soft tissue contact the changes in the properties of the vibrating system are quantified. Based on an analytical model, the mechanical impedance of the material in contact is determined from these data and the complex shear modulus G* is evaluated for each resonance frequency. The dependency of the complex shear modulus on contact force, vibration amplitude, frequency, and number of loading cycles can be studied with this experiment. The mechanical properties of soft tissues are determined in the frequency range 1-10 kHz. Thanks to the high sensitivity of the sensor for vibration detection, the vibration amplitude can be kept very small, so that a linear viscoelastic material model can be used. The soft tissue is modeled as a semi-infinite, homogenous, isotropic medium; a boundary condition is applied in correspondence of the contact with the vibrating rod. The elastodynamic wave equation is solved for the specified torsional excitation. Depending on the soft tissue properties, shear waves (SH waves) propagate mainly in the radial direction or in the vertical direction, toward the tissue interior, as shown in Figure 6. The experiment is designed to enable in-vivo measurements of material properties. In particular, the requirements for application during open surgery are satisfied: each component can be sterilized; performing the whole measurement requires only few seconds; the experiment is non-destructive, since the amplitude of the vibration is small and the soft tissue is not damaged. Results obtained from ex-vivo measurements on bovine liver are presented in Figure 7, showing the frequencydependent behavior of the complex shear modulus at high frequencies.
