Structural Diagnosis of Concrete Bridges by Acoustic Emission The main aim of this project is to develop a monitoring procedure that provides quantitative assessment of structural health condition. Reliable evaluation and localization of destructive processes permits an effective planning of necessary engagements like further assessment and repairs. General outline In order to obtain adequate information about structural performance, appropriate monitoring is necessary. Applied techniques should be capable of discovering, localizing and evaluating developing processes in a structure that are leading to local as well as global failures. Effective and early discovery and recognition of destructive processes will help in optimizing actions on structures namely planning of examination and repair. The main aim of the study is to recognize and evaluate destructive processes initiating and developing inside a structure. Acoustic Emission (AE) that is a passive non-destructive technique is considered. The relevance of recorded events namely acoustic signals that correspond to active i.e. initiating and developing destructive processes will be evaluated. The acoustic signals will be recorded in the zones of a considered structure that are subject to elevated stresses. It is expected that higher acoustic activity is activated by heavy traffic. Therefore, the level of damage severity will be related to measured external parameters that are acceleration, strain and temperature. The monitoring will be performed under regular operating conditions. In order to capture unforeseen activities, the monitoring should be performed continuously over a long period of time. The study considers mainly field but also laboratory investigations. The field monitoring is performed on an existing prestressed concrete box girder bridge in Zurich (Hermetschloobrücke). This viaduct, built in the 1970s, crosses the SBB railway lines and is a continuous girder with 9 spans. The investigations consider signal propagation in lightweight concrete with respect to the regular traffic. The sensors are installed inside the box on the soffit of the top slab. The readings are automatically synchronized and activated by trigger events, namely vehicles passing over the considered measurement areas. This monitoring approach should reduce and pre-select recorded data. The planned outcome is a procedure that automatically detects warning signal activities and supports the prognosis of the structural safety and serviceability. Monitoring equipment For the AE monitoring, a Vallen AMSY-5/6 system is used. It comprises up to 24 high-speed AE and 4 standard parametric input channels. The type of sensors, i.e. AE and parametric, are chosen based on the considered structure and the given monitoring conditions. For AE long term monitoring, conical piezoelectric sensors are applied that are flat sensitive in a wide range of frequencies. The external parameters to be measured are acceleration and strain together with temperature. The accelerations are measured as parametric inputs to the AMSY acquisition unit. For this purpose, single axis acceleration sensors are used. To measure the dynamic strain, Fiber Bragg Grating (FBG) deformation sensors in longitudinal and transverse directions are applied. The acquisition activation trigger that is related to the regular traffic is a web camera installed above the street level, on the street lamp facing the street surface. All parametric are registered in the time-domain and are synchronised with the AE acquisition. Signal analysis c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> The monitoring and measurement results will be evaluated in a qualitative and quantitative manner with help of commercial software. Regarding the qualitative analysis, pattern recognition of the basic AE signal parameters will be performed. These parameters include amplitude, signal strength, energy, duration, peak amplitude, raise time, etc. Additional parameters that carry frequency information may be retrieved from recorded waveforms. The analysis will furthermore consider the problem of data normalization, filtering and clustering. Pre-processed AE signals will be plotted together with the parameters of exposures in the time domain. Data interpretation and system applicability The study aims at creating a classified experimental data base that corresponds to the critical levels of signal activity. Based on the activity analysis of the developing destructive processes, criteria levels will be adjusted in order to be included the standard inspection reports that are known in practise. This involves however numerous field investigations to gain the necessary knowledge about the signal activity in prestressed concrete bridges operating in different regular traffic conditions.
