CubETH CubETH is a Swiss nano-satellite project. ETH is responsible for the science payload of the satellite, which will be equipped with single-frequency GNSS receivers. Science goals are precise orbit determination, attitude determination, GNSS comparison/combination and some experimental measurements. CubETH is a cooperative Swiss CubeSat project of ETH Zurich, EPF Lausanne, the Swiss Space Center (SSC), several Universities of Applied Sciences, and Swiss companies. The 10cm x 10cm x 10cm nano-satellite, following the CubeSat standard, will be equipped with several low-cost single-frequency GNSS receivers of the type u-blox NEO-7N. The scientific goals of the project are: - precise orbit determination (for a cube satellite based on single-frequency GNSS, post processing and real-time) - satellite attitude determination (for a cube satellite based on single-frequency GNSS, post processing and real-time (proof of concept)) - GNSS comparison and combination (with first GNSS receiver in space tracking GPS, GLONASS, QZSS, and ready for Galileo and Compass) - experimental measurements (such as receiver performance for occultation satellites, air density estimation during re-entry phase) While EPFL is responsible for the satellite, ETH-GGL is responsible for the scientific payload. In particular, the onboard Payload Data processing Software as well as the real-time and postprocessing analysis is done by ETH-GGL. Furthermore, numerous tests, studies and analyses in the first phase of the project were done by ETH-GGL. u-blox GNSS receivers are low-cost single-frequency COTS receivers for embedded solutions, characterized by good performance and very small size, weight and power consumption and, therefore, predestined for CubeSat missions. However, they are not space-qualified. Therefore, in the first phase of the project, numerous tests have been performed in order to study the behaviour of the receivers in the intended space environment and to evaluate their usability for space applications. The tests performed up to now include radiation, temperature, power consumption, rotation, attitude determination and GNSS simulator tests. In the radiation tests, no module was completely broken and no memory damaged, but high total c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> doses may make a module unusable. There were no significant performance differences observed between irradiated and not irradiated modules. Furthermore, the u-blox receivers showed a remarkable autonomous recovery behavior (82% of SEE). In the CubETH mission, SEE have to be expected around every 2.5 days or every 40 orbit periods. In the temperature and vacuum tests U we were mainly interested in the behaviour of the internal clock apart from physical resistance U under extreme temperatures and temperature changes and its effects on the measuring performance of the receiver. The u-blox modules under test survived vacuum and large temperature cycles and continued GNSS tracking under these extreme conditions. Loss of phase lock and solution outages sometimes occurred at sudden changes from very cold to very warm, but the receivers always autonomously recovered within few seconds. At very low temperatures, very large negative clock drifts were observed. The main goals of the power consumption tests are to obtain detailed performance figures and to establish optimum receiver configuration and operation scenarios for minimised power consumption. Attitude determination, rotation and GNSS imulator tests revealed valuable information about the receiverSs performance in tracking and measuring GNSS under space conditions and its impact on the scientific tasks. GPS signal simulator tests were used to analyze the performance of the u-blox navigation solution in simulated LEO orbits. A position accuracy of around 3.5 m and a velocity accuracy of around 0.04 m/s were reached. The position was systematically around 2.5 m too high, 1 m behind and the orbital plane slightly tilted. The results of the tests carried out up to now support the conclusion that the u-blox receivers selected are usable for space applications in LEO orbits. The receivers are not fully resistant to effects due to space environment, but a concept including the selection of robust final modules with TCXO, latch-up protection and redundant receivers as designed for CubETH is very promising.
