Topics in real and complex analysis CR geometry, geodesic rigidity, spectral graph theory, infinite dimensional complex analysis, transformation groups, contact geometry, cayley graphs, nonlinear elasticity, Cartan connections, density property, Stein manifolds, holomorphic factorization, Gamma convergence, Weyl structures, etc A1: A fundamental problem in non-linear elasticity is to understand the relation between the full three-dimensional theory and lower dimensional theories. Only in recent time, rigorous approaches to the dimension reduction problem have cleared up the situation for one and two dimensional elasticity. Situated between one and two-dimensional objects, the theory of Sadowsky describes the elastic behaviour of strips, e.g., a long and thin strip of paper: Such a strip is basically onedimensional since it is completely determined by the curve formed by its axis, but it still exhibits a two-dimensional behaviour as it has a flexible and a rigid bending direction, given by the normal and the binormal. The theory of elastic strips, while established by Sadowsky in 1930 has not yet been understood in the same rigorous way as indicated above. Our aim is to establish a derivation of the Sadowsky theory by Gamma-convergence. A2: A smooth manifold M is called geodesically rigid in the sense of Riemann, if any two Riemannian metrics whose geodesics coincide (as unparametrised curves), are proportional. Geodesic rigidity in the sense of Riemann is well understood locally and even globally. However to the authors knowledge nothing seems to be known about geodesic rigidity in the sense of Weyl, i.e. existence of Weyl connections whose geodesics coincide up to parametrisation. Therefore we try to give a local normal form for pairs of Weyl connections whose unparametrised geodesics coincide and try to find classes of manifolds which are globally Weyl geodesically rigid. A3: Information security is a crucial aspect of our highly connected electronic world. For instance, data need to be stored and transmitted securely and users and systems need to be authenticated reliably. With the increased importance and value of data and systems at risk, also the efforts and means to break and misuse such systems or to steal data have increased. Furthermore, new technological developments such as quantum cryptography or quantum computing fuel the race between methods to secure systems and data and methods to break and misuse them. The goal of this project is to investigate new mathematical approaches and methods inspired from the fields of analysis (particularly the heat equation) and from graph theory. With this, we hope to contribute valuable results to both, mathematics and to the most recent developments in cryptography. B1-B4: The research in this part of the project is centered around geometric questions in Complex Analysis, mainly Several Complex Variables. We actively take part in developing a newly emerged area called Complex Elliptic Geometry. This area is investigating flexibility properties in Complex Analytic Geometry. One of it's central notions the notion of an Oka manifold has recently been introduced by Forstneric. Maps from Stein spaces into Oka manifolds are very flexible by the Oka-Grauert-Gromov-h-principle. We work both on a general theory by studying their properties under natural operations and on finding good examples of such manifolds. Most importantly we work on applications of the theory to very natural problems. Here we do both investigate problems c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> using fixed coordinate systems and problems where the right choice of coordinates is the main problem. The approach to that second sort of problems is by studying the symmetry group leaving the given structure invariant. These transformation groups play a fundamental role in many mathematical theories. Quite often they help to discover new interesting phenomena. An example for that is the following very ambitious question: Can one characterize C^n among all Stein manifolds of dimension n by geometric data and data on the group of holomorphic automorphisms? The study of transformation groups of a space has intrinsic relations to the question of how the space or other spaces (playing the role of fixed points or more generally of Luna strata) can be embedded into euclidean space. Can every open Riemann surface be embedded into C^2? We orient our research on well-known problems in the field which have been attracting interest of the specialists for a long time and are still important. There are for instance the Abhyankar-Sathaye conjecture, the Zariski Cancellation Problem and their complex analytic analogs, Gromov's Vaserstein problem, other examples are the classical problems about the embedding dimension of open Riemann surfaces and other standard objects like the polydisc or the ball. There are intrinsic connections to Affine Algebraic Geometry. C: The main problem we are interested in this project is the weighted (in the sense of Catlin's multitype) jet determination problem for Aut(M,p), the stability group of a real hypersurface M at p, in the light of the Chern-Moser operator. We are also interested by the following problems and questions. Study the odd dimensional analogous of Calabi-Yau manifolds and Quantum Inner State manifolds in the general frame of contact geometry. Suppose that M is a real analytic generic submanifold in C^n, U is a neighborhood of a point p in M, and Omega subset U is a wedge with edge M at p. Suppose that F: U -> C^N is a meromorphic mapping whose restriction to Omega maps Omega holomorphically into the open unit ball in C^N, N >= n, and that for each point q in U intersection M, || F(z)|| -> 1 as z -> q (z in Omega). Does F extend to a holomorphic mapping in some neighborhood of p? Let X be a complex separable Banach space, B(R) subset X the ball of radius R>0 about the origin, and f a holomorphic function on B(R). Given r in (0,R) and epsilon > 0, is there a function h, holomorphic on X, such that |f-h| < epsilon on B(r)?
