Blind Juggler In the Blind Juggler project, we explore hardware and control design of juggling robots. Our goal is to achieve complex juggling patterns with minimal feedback and actuation. We successfully built a juggling robot that is able to vertically bounce a completely unconstrained ball without any sensing at heights of up to 2.2 meters. The robot consists of a linear motor actuating a machined aluminum paddle (see Graphics 1). The curvature of this paddle keeps the ball from falling off while the apex height of the ball is stabilized by decelerating the paddle at impact. We analyzed the mapping of perturbations of the nominal trajectory over a single bounce to determine the design parameters that stabilize the system. The first robot prototype confirmed the results from the stability analysis and exhibits substantial robustness to perturbations in the horizontal degree of freedoms. We further measured the performance of the robot using impact location and impact time measurements. From the measurements, we identified the noise introduced into the system as white noise. This allows optimizing the design parameters by minimizing the H2 norm of an input-output representation of the system. Using the impact time measurement as a feedback signal, we designed an H2 optimal controller and compared its performance to openloop both in theory and experiments. We found that while a significant improvement is predicted in theory, we only obtain marginal improvements in practice. We have also built a second prototype called the Pendulum Juggler (see Graphics 2, you may also watch a video on the website in link 2.). It swings the motor and paddle back and forth while bouncing a ball. The ball trajectory is open-loop stable; however, we need to control the motion of the pendulum. Currently, we are exploring ways to use the motion of the paddle as a control input. Lastly, we developed the Cloverleaf paddle that allows simultaneous, indefinite juggling of four balls. Using this paddle, we are exploring the possibility of exploiting properties of nonlinear systems to automatically generate different juggling patterns. This is illustrated in the video available in link 1.
