Identification of chromatin-based interactions of Heat-shock protein 90 (Hsp90) Identification of chromatin-based interactions of Heat-shock protein 90 (Hsp90) Heat-shock protein 90 (Hsp90) is a central molecular chaperone involved in stabilization and folding of a large number of signaling proteins and transcription factors. It is thought to be involved in maintaining genetic variation in wild populations, thus accelerating evolution. Additionally, Hsp90 inhibitors are in clinical trials for cancer therapy. How does a simple molecule like Hsp90 perform such diverse tasks at an organismal level is not clear. While most molecular studies have focused on cytosolic Hsp90, many recent studies have pointed out the role of this chaperone in gene regulation directly at chromatin. The nuclear life of Hsp90 is an emerging theme, and this aspect forms a central theme of the present proposal. There are three important questions in the field of nuclear roles of Hsp90, which form the basis of this proposal: (i) which co-chaperones help Hsp90 at chromatin? Are there any specific co-chaperones that help Hsp90 exclusively in the nucleus? (ii) What are the client proteins that Hsp90 helps fold within the nucleus? What nuclear transactions are controlled by this chaperone? (iii) How does Hsp90 maintain protein homeostasis within the nucleus? These long-term goals require a detailed molecular understanding of the nuclear Hsp90, and the present proposal takes the first step in deciphering the same using a three-tier approach. The proposal is aimed at identifying interacting proteins of Hsp90 in fly and mammalian nuclei by applying global proteomic approaches. This will uncover the chromatin-specific co-chaperones as well as client proteins that are dependent on Hsp90 inside the nucleus. Many of these proteins will be confirmed by genome-wide chromatin profiling to compare if they bind chromatin at sites close to Hsp90-bound sites. Additionally, the work will confirm functionality of these molecular interactions by performing perturbation experiments assessing gene regulation as an output. Most importantly, the identified partners will be confirmed to co-occupy sites of Hsp90 binding in vivo in flies using polytene staining. Thus a combination of genomic, proteomic and in vivo approaches will be employed to unequivocally answer the questions surrounding the nuclear life of Hsp90.
