Creeping constrained landslides under extreme environmental and seismic conditions The goal of the project is the development of a methodology for the short and long-term risk assessment and management associated with constrained creeping landslides due to earthquakes and average and extreme weather events affected by global climate changes. Creeping landslides in urban and rural areas are a source of constant danger for built infrastructure. While the geotechnical landslide research in general is a mature area, the case of large constrained creeping landslides has only recently received attention in the literature, in spite of the fact that many landslides are either naturally constrained by a rock outcrop or artificially constrained by a protective structure. While these recent research efforts were able to provide models for steady state conditions for constrained landslides, the critical influence of extreme weather or seismic events has not yet been studied. Since the occurrence and magnitude of these extreme events are of probabilistic nature their modelling requires explicit consideration of relevant uncertainties, i.e., stochastic models need to be employed. Furthermore, no definitive risk assessment framework for slowly moving landslides has been established. Consequently, the evaluation of risk related to such landslides and of risk mitigation measures is often hard to perform. The here proposed interdisciplinary approach combining geotechnical and seismic engineering study with stochastic modelling aims to close these gaps. Our ultimate goal is understanding of the mechanisms of the constrained creeping landslides and effects of environmental and seismic events on the landslide behaviour and associated risks for society. This understanding becomes especially important under conditions of climate change, which make this task even more complex and challenging. The goal of the proposed project is the development of methodology for the short and long-term risk assessment and management associated with constrained creeping landslides due to earthquakes and average and extreme weather events affected by global climate changes. This goal can only be achieved by combining expertise in deterministic and probabilistic modelling of the landslide mechanisms, environmental effects and risk assessment, supported by a collaboration between the Geomechanics Group of ETH Zurich and Structural Reliability Group of Heriot-Watt University, UK. Towards this goal the following objectives will be achieved: Formulation of deterministic models Evaluation of the model parameters using inverse analysis Validation of the deterministic model under transient environmental and seismic conditions Probabilistic models of environmental and seismic impact Probabilistic analysis of creeping landslides Risk assessment and management associated with creeping landslides Effects of climate change on creeping landslide risk assessment and management c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> Recommendations on application of the proposed methodology to risk assessment for constrained creeping landslides in conditions of climate change
