Reductive immobilization of hexavalent chromium by biochar: Understanding processes for improved soil remediation Toxic hexavalent chromium (Cr(VI)) contaminates soil and groundwater around the world at sites close to past and present chromium processing facilities. This has established chromium as a contaminant of very high concern in the EU and a priority in countries such as India and the US. Toxic hexavalent chromium (Cr(VI)) contaminates soil and groundwater around the world at sites close to past and present chromium processing facilities. This has established chromium as a contaminant of very high concern in the EU and a priority in countries such as India and the US. Recently, it has been proposed that biochar ammendments to agricultural soils may help to alleviate the toxic effects of Cr(VI) pollution. Biochar is a charcoal-like substance that can be produced in inexpensive ovens from agricultural waste like cornhusks. Through a process-based approach, the proposed research here will provide the first evaluation of its kind for biochar as a chromium remediation material. We hypothesize that on its outer surfaces, biochar can effectively reduce Cr(VI) to a nontoxic, immobile, and stable form of the metal, Cr(III). To this end, this project will produce a rigorous demonstration of the redox and sorption interactions of Cr(VI) with biochar materials in aqueous suspensions and when mixed into soil. The milestones used to measure the success of this project will be (1) characterization of biochar using an innovative technique to determine the redox activity of substrates, (2) determination of how quickly biochar transforms chromium in both soil and groundwater, (3) determination of how much chromium can be converted per mass of biochar, (4) elucidation of the binding of the non-toxic Cr(III) produced, and (5) determination of where chromium is converted within the complex biochar matrix. To this end, the proposed project will involve electrochemical experiments on biochar, experiments in which solutions of chromium are exposed to biochar and a biochar/soil mixture, and characterization of water, soil, and biochar from these mixtures using synchrotron Xray absorption spectroscopy (XAS). XAS will yield quantitative information about the oxidation states of Cr in the solid phase, and reveal the micro-scale spatial distribution and binding environment of immobilized Cr(III) within single biochar grains. The results of this research will strengthen the scientific basis for evaluating the suitability of a remarkably low-cost material that can potentially remediate chromium hazards and reduce plant uptake of Cr. If effectual, the mechanisms elucidated by this research could propel biochar into a position of immediate utility for alleviating soil pollution with hexavalent chromium. The results will be communicated in at least two peer-reviewed publications and presented by the Fellowship candidate at international conferences.
