Numerical and Experimental Investigations of Non-Newtonian Biaxial Flow in Annular Gaps The aim of this project is to investigate the non-Newtonian flow behaviour of incompressible fluids (multiphase and macromolecular food fluids) during processing (i.e. heat treatment, crystallisation, mixing) in annular gaps with/without installations (screw, wall scrapers, mixing elements, etc.). The main aspects of this research project are: Process Design / Flow Measurements - Using a transparent concentric shear gap apparatus, investigations of the flow pattern and the velocity profile will be made by laser light sheet and LDA technique, respectively. A production device (pilot plant scale) will provide information about the pressure, the temperature, the torque, the rotational speed and the flow rate for various geometries and operating conditions such as the gap width and length, the number of shear scrapers or other installations, the rotational speed, the volume flow rate and the input pressure. Rheology / Development of a Constitutive Equation - The rheological behaviour of a real food system (here: chocolate) will be investigated in order to generate model systems (Polyacrylamid or Carboxymethylcellulose solutions, lime stone/ silicon oil suspensions) with similar material behaviour but transparent for the optical measurements in the transparent apparatus. The development of a constitutive equation will provide a tool for describing the shear stress behaviour of the non-Newtonian fluid system to be implemented in a numerical algorithm for flow simulation. Numerical Simulation - An existing numerical algorithm (Finite Volume Code, TU Munich) will be modified in order to solve non-Newtonian fluid problems. This includes incorporation of an appropriate constitutive equation (see above). Discrete experimental results for pressure, temperature and velocity (from process experiments) will be compared with numerical results. If necessary, different constitutive equations will be considered until an accurate model for a specific Non-Newtonian fluid system is found. Optimisation / Modelling - The numerical code enables two main features: a) The local physical data for temperature, pressure, velocity, energy dissipation and heat transfer in the small gap geometries (1-5 mm) can be determined throughout the whole geometry without disrupting the flow behaviour. Measurement in such small gaps during processing are inaccurate or impossible b) The numerical program will provide means for considering different geometries without the necessity to build another c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> device in order to optimise the design and to scale up.
