Purification of therapeutic proteins using continuous chromatography Use and development of Multicolumn Countercurrent Solvent Gradient Purification (MCSGP) provides benefits in terms of yield, purity and productivity. These advantages are investigated with respect to a variety of industrially relevant proteins and protein variants. Biomolecules produced by means of recombinant cell cultures or chemical synthesis become increasingly important in the pharmaceutical and biotechnological industry. In particular, antibodies have earned interest due to their large field of application that includes medicine (vaccines, cancer treatment) and analytics (immuno assays). As a consequence of the manufacturing procedure, the target biomolecules are contaminated with media components and impurities originating from cell lysis or from chemical synthesis, some of them exhibiting very similar adsorptive properties as the target molecule. These impurities need to be removed from the product in the downstream process, typically in a three fraction separation. The state-of-the-art purification of biomolecules includes several chromatographic steps. The pu mode, consisting of equilibration, rifications are usually operated in discontinuous (or Sbatch ¸ T) loading, washing, purification and regeneration steps. The discontinuous mode of operation allows exploiting the advantage of solvent gradients, but it implies high solvent consumptions and low productivities with respect to continuous countercurrent processes. An established process of this kind is the simulated moving bed technique (SMB) that requires the solvent-consuming steps of equilibration, washing, regeneration only once per operation and has a better resin utilization. However, major drawbacks of SMB are the inability of separating a mixture into three fractions and the lack of solvent gradient applicability. In the case of antibodies, the state-of-the-art technique is based on batch affinity chromatography (with Protein A or Protein G as ligands) which is able to selectively bind antibody molecules. In general, affinity techniques have the advantage of purifying biomolecules with high yields and purities but the disadvantages are in general the high stationary phase cost, ligand leaching and reduced cleanability. The Multicolumn Counter-Current Solvent Gradient Purification (MCSGP) technique [1] developed in the Morbidelli group represents an improved purification technology that allows for use of conventional stationary phases while offering the advantages of improved yield, purity and productivity as SMB. This is achieved through countercurrent and solvent gradient modes of operation. The process is able to perform three fraction separations as required in biochromatography. The aim of the research project is to implement the MCSGP-process for the purification of various biomolecules such as monoclonal antibodies. In the case of purification of antibodies from cell culture supernatant it is the aim to apply the process and to receive comparable product purity as with affinity chromatography. Through the applications a deeper understanding of unit-specific phenomena such as the influence of dead volumes and system-specific phenomena such as displacement effects will be gained. Another aim of the project is the improvement of the process and increase of the process robustness. If necessary, a modification of the process setup will be carried out and additional steps, such as cleaning-in-place will be implemented. The process is to be designed and modelled in a rational way based on isotherm and mass transfer parameter determinations. Biomolecule specific phenomena (e.g. the presence of variants, biomolecule aggregation) and their consequences for the separation using MCSGP will be examined and modeled as far as possible. 1. Aumann L, Morbidelli M. 2005. European Patent, EP 05405327.7, EP 05405421.8. Continuous c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> or quasi-continuous purification of multi-component mixture comprises running individual chromatographic columns in batch mode step(s) and continuous or quasi-continuous mode step(s) synchronously or sequentiallyall rights for this patent are with ChromaCon Ltd., www.chromacon.ch. 2. Muller-Spath T, Aumann L, Morbidelli M. 2008. Role of Cleaning-in-Place in the purification of mAb supernatants using continuous cation exchange chromatography, accepted by separation science and technology
