Assembly of type 1 pili from Escherichia coli Type 1 pili of Escherichia coli are large, heterooligomeric protein complexes anchored to the outer bacterial membrane and required for the attachment of the bacteria to host cell surfaces. The pili are critical virulence factors of uropathogenic E. coli strains and mediate the long-term survival of the bacteria within host cells. Type 1 pili are thus targets for the development of new antibiotics against infections of the urinary tract. Such drugs may either prevent pilus assembly or abolish their ability to bind to host cell surfaces. A single E. coli cell may bear up to 500 type 1 pili, each being 7 nm wide and 0.5-2.0 \gmm long. Each pilus exclusively consists of protein, with an average number of about 1000 subunits per pilus. 98% of the pilus subunits are comprised of the main structural pilus subunit FimA, while the residual 2% of the subunits are composed of 4 additional subunits, namely FimF, FimG, FimI and the mannose-binding subunit FimH. Assembly of the pilus in vivo requires the assembly factor FimC, a soluble, periplasmic chaperone protein that is not a component of the pilus. In collaboration with the group of Prof. K. Wüthrich, we have solved the three-dimensional structure of FimC in solution by NMR spectroscopy. FimC is a monomeric, 205-residue protein that consists of two domains with immunoglobulin-like fold. FimC forms stoichiometric complexes with the individual subunits and delivers them to the growing pilus which is anchored to the outer membrane via the assembly platform protein FimD. It is believed that FimC recognizes the 5 diffferent type 1 pilus subunits via their conserved C-terminal 8-10 amino acid residues. The X-ray structure of PapD, the homologous chaperone of P pili, complexed with synthetic peptides corresponding to the C-terminal segments of P pilus subunits, shows that the peptides are bound in an extended conformation to the N-terminal PapD domain (Kuehn et al., Science 262, 1234-1241; Soto et al., EMBO J. 17, 6155-6167). Using the 51 kDa complex between FimC and the intact, 28 kDa mannose-binding subunit FimH as a model for pilus chaperone/subunit interactions we have characterized the complete binding surface of FimC for FimH with 15N and 1H chemical shift mapping by applying transverse-relaxation-optimized NMR spectroscopy (TROSY). The binding surface for FimH is almost entirely formed by residues from the N-terminal FimC domain and is much larger than the peptide binding surface observed in the PapD/peptide complexes. This large contact area indicates that FimC, unlike other chaperones, specifically binds to folded forms of the pilus subunits. We propose that the main function of FimC is the prevention of premature pilus assembly in the periplasm. The main task of the C-terminal FimC domain may be the specific recognition of the assembly platform FimD for subsequent delivery of the subunits to the growing pilus.
