Phosphate Acquisition at the Root/Soil Interface and Subsequent Translocation Our major interest is the acquisition at the soil/root interface of phosphorus (P) and its subsequent translocation in the plant and the molecular and biochemical processes involved in P transport. P is an important macronutrient in higher plants. It plays a role in energy and sugar metabolism, it is an important structural component of nucleic acids and phospholipids and acts as a substrate and as a controlling factor in photosynthesis-related metabolism. Finally, it also greatly influences the quality and yield of crop plants. P is taken up by plant roots as the monovalent anion orthophosphate (Pi). Whereas Pi concentrations in the soil solution are in the micromolar range, it accumulates to millimolar concentrations in the cytoplasm of plant root cells. The selective transport against this steep concentration gradient across the intact membrane is mediated by membrane carriers or permeases and driven by the energy supply of plasmamembrane bound H+-ATPases. In the last years, several (high-affinity) Pi transporters from different higher plants, e.g. Arabidopsis thaliana, Solanum tuberosum and Lycopersicon esculentum have been isolated via screening of cDNA libraries for clones that show a high degree of sequence similarity to highaffinity Pi transporters from yeast, Neurospora crassa, Glomus versiforme or ESTs of Arabidopsis thaliana. One of these cDNAs (LePT1), which was isolated from a root hair-specific cDNA library of tomato in our laboratory, has been characterised in detail at a molecular and biochemical level. In situ hybridisation studies localized the transcript to rhizodermal cells including root hairs and root cap cells. In our model, LePT1 plays a significant role in Pi uptake at the root/soil interface. To further investigate the role of LePT1 in Pi acquisition in roots, the LePT1 cDNA was cloned behind a promotor from Arabidopsis thaliana, which shows preferred expression in roots. Using this construct, transgenic Arabidopis lines have been generated, which are currently under investigation. In parallel, while using the heterologous system of Arabidopsis thaliana for LePT1, we also make use of the antisense technology in tomato. Another Pi transporter cDNA from Arabidopsis thaliana (Pperm) has recently been cloned. Pperm belongs to a different class of Pi transporters. Its molecular and biochemical characteristics are presently investigated using yeast complementation analysis, Pi uptake experiments, northern blot hybridisation and in situ localization studies. Another approach to clarify the role of Pperm in Pi-uptake and/or homeostasis will be the isolation of Pperm homologs from potato. Overexpression and antisense expression with the homologous cDNA are ideal tools for further molecular physiological investigations in order to demonstrate the role of this new class of Pi transporters in Pi translocation and crop productivity.
