Simulation Platform The Simulation Platform is part of the Future Cities Laboratory and one of its 9 Research Modules. In science, simulations have assumed a critical role between theory and practical ex-periment. In architecture, the use of simulation to support processes connecting de-sign, construction, facility management, and building lifecycles is increasing. In urban planning, simulation has become an indispensable method for generating and analys-ing design and planning scenarios. Simulation not only helps in understanding urban-rural metabolism with its associated stocks and flows, but also supports design and decision-making processes in a crucial way. At the present time, however, most simulations are only capable of capturing a small fraction of an urban model across different scales. Among the main reasons is the rapid growth of urban-related data, either acquired or generated, resulting in vast and often difficult to access databases that require serious computing power. In particular, when looking at evolving urban planning methodologies that make use of live and dynamic data, it becomes evident that todaySs tools, such as GIS, are unable to keep pace with the growing information volume, especially when it comes to filtering and communicating relevant information. Therefore, the central research questions of the proposed project are: T ¸ How will future data acquisition, organisation, retrieval, interaction, visualisation techniques and instruments effectively deal with an ever-increasing volume of urban-related information? T ¸ How can these techniques be successfully made available to designers, decision-makers and stakeholders to provide all the necessary information about the city for a continuous design and planning process? ´ The term SeffectiveS refers to techniques and instruments that are able to deal with dynamic data, reduce management overhead, are readily available, and can be easily accessed and applied in practical urban planning scenarios. As indicated in Figure 1 the Simulation Platform module is divided into two comple-mentary parts, each with an overarching goal: 1. Service part (S): To provide initial basic services, such as communication and simulation tools or database and visualisation facilities, to the other streams of the Future Cities Laboratory. 2. Research part (O): To expand these services through research that optimises modelling techniques for the scientists and designers of the other streams so they can better understand complex mechanisms in their disciplines and apply advanced analysis, modelling and simulation methods. The Simulation Platform service part will initially contain loosely integrated simula-tion, visualisation and communication tools. The research part will integrate the tools more seamlessly, and expand their capabilities in coordination with all other modules.
