Large-scale Adaptive Sensing, Learning and Decision Making: Theory and Applications (SCADAPT) How can one act effectively while facing a deluge of data? We seek to advance large-scale adaptive decision making under uncertainty, by grounding it in the novel computational framework of adaptive submodular optimization. We develop novel algorithms and apply them in several challenging domains. We address one of the fundamental challenges of our time: Acting effectively while facing a deluge of data. Massive volumes of data are now generated from corporate and public sources every second, in social, scientific and commercial applications. In addition, more and more low level sensor devices are becoming available and accessible. Numerous applications could leverage the integration of these different forms of data. However, access to the data is limited, due to computational, bandwidth, power limitations, as well as limited human attention. Crucially, simply sensing and gathering data is not enough: we need to make decisions based on the information we obtain. Thus, one of the key problems is: How can we obtain most decision-relevant information at minimum cost? Decision making under partial observability is a notoriously hard problem: Most existing techniques are either heuristics with no guarantees, or do not scale to large problems. Our recent research has shown that many information gathering problems satisfy submodularity, an intuitive diminishing returns condition. Exploiting this criterion allowed us to develop algorithms that have strong performance guarantees and perform well on real applications. However, existing algorithms are limited: they cannot cope with dynamic phenomena that change over time, do not generalize from previous tasks, and are inherently centralized and thus do not scale with modern, distributed computing paradigms. Perhaps most crucially, they have been designed with the focus of gathering data, but not for making decisions based on this data. The ERC project seeks to substantially advance large-scale adaptive decision making under uncertainty, by grounding it in the novel computational framework of adaptive submodular optimization. It will develop groundbreaking new scalable techniques bridging statistical learning, combinatorial optimization, probabilistic inference and decision theory, in order to overcome the limitation of existing methods. In addition to developing theoretically well-founded, rigorous approaches, we are committed to demonstrate the performance of our methods on three challenging real world interdisciplinary problems in community sensing, information retrieval and sequential decision making in computational sustainability.
