Electro-optical Microring Resonators for Photonic Applications In this project we will develop electro-optically tunable microring resonators based on single-crystalline ferroelectric thin films, which will serve as building blocks for various optical processing functions, such as add/drop multiplexers and tunable filters for telecommunication applications. Optical microring resonators and large refractive index contrast waveguides are considered as one of the main building blocks for future very large scale integration (VLSI) photonics. The two attributes that make microring resonators very appealing are their versatile functionality and small size. Over the last decade, they have been investigated for add/drop multiplexing applications, tunable filters, laser and active applications, dispersion compensation, polarization rotators, as well as biosensors. Several technologies were investigated in the past for the fabrication of microring resonators in glass, polymers, and semiconductor materials. High index contrast microring resonators have been fabricated in glass materials, and their potential to realize filters and other functional elements in integrated optics has been demonstrated. The successful demonstration of these passive devices proved the feasibility of high index contrast devices. In this project we will realize electro-optically active microring resonators, whose resonance wavelength will be tunable simply by applying a voltage to the electrodes on the device. Since the electro-optically induced refractive index changes in crystals are very fast, rapid lightwave switches can be made. Ferroelectric crystals with large electro-optic coefficients, such as lithium niobate (LiNbO3), lithium tantalate (LiTaO3), and potassium niobate (KNbO3), will be used for the fabrication of microring resonators. As the first step toward realization of electro-optically active microring resonators, our research activities will focus on fabrication of thin ferroelectric films by a novel method which we call Smart Guide . This method is analogous to the smart-cut technique used in the semiconductor industry. It allows the fabrication of thin waveguiding crystal films with a bulk-crystal quality and high index of refraction on almost any substrate, including low refractive index cladding materials. For this purpose the crystal is first implanted with He+ or protons to high doses. The implanted surface of the crystal is then bonded to the substrate. After a thermal treatment, which will be also investigated in this project, the implanted layer is split off the original crystal and transferred to the substrate. As an important part of this research phase, linear, nonlinear optical and electro-optical properties of the produced thin films will also be investigated in order to optimize the annealing process. In the next phase of the project we will develop technologies for fabrication of integrated electro-optical components, such as microring resonators and Mach-Zehnder modulators, based on the produced thin ferroelectric films. Metallic electrodes will be included for modulating and tuning purposes. Different patterning methods, such as UV laser writing and e-beam lithography, as well as etching techniques will be examined. The successful development of thin ferroelectric films with a quality comparable to bulk crystals will lead to a unique platform for the future highly integrated active photonic devices. To demonstrate its great potential, the novel platform will be used for realization of Mach-Zehnder modulators and tunable microring resonators as building blocks for various optical signal processing functions. These active devices will be distinguished by their small size, high-speed, and low-voltage operation. As such, they will be of special interest for telecommunication applications and novel biochemical sensing techniques.
