Investigation of product quality of monoclonal antibodies under different culture process conditions Fundamental study of the effect of culture process variables (dissolved gases, pH, hydrodynamic forces, media composition) on the cell performance, metabolism and product quality (charged variants, glycosylation) of monoclonal antibodies Monoclonal antibodies (mAb) are target-oriented biotherapeutics that are used for the treatment of various diseases. It is estimated that in the next decade approximately 30% of newly licensed drugs will be based on antibody products. The production of antibodies is rather sophisticated as their efficiency is critically dependent on appropriate posttranslational modifications (PTM). All currently licensed antibody therapeutics have therefore been produced by mammalian cell culture. The use of mammalian cell culture technology for the production of glycoproteins and in particular mAbs, has improved in the last years. However, the effect of process parameters in the production process (e.g. pH, CO2, O2 and shear stress), as well as variations in the media composition on product stability and product quality is still waiting to be fully understood. The aim of this project is, on the one hand, to understand how external factors can induce changes in cell metabolism that can for example result in the accumulation of waste metabolites, and how external parameters affect the productivity of cells. On the other hand, the project aims in investigating the effect of external factors on product quality attributes such as glycosylation, which can affect the pharmacokinetics of the antibody. Finally, the gained knowledge is used in the development of a multi-scale model that is able to describe the effect of external factors on cell growth kinetics, metabolism and on cell productivity. This will include the improvement of existing unstructured models in combination with metabolic flux analysis in order to obtain a more operating boundaries fundamental understanding of cultured cell behavior and to identify Ssafe ¸ T during cultivation processes.
