Assessing the potential of biochar amendments to decrease N losses from agricultural soils we identify the conditions in which BC prevents N losses by examining: effect of different BC materials on overall N cycling from a process and microbial levels; interactions between N inputs and BC additions; role of soil pH on end products of denitrification;and performance of BC at farm-level. Description This research evaluates biochar as a means to improve N management in organic farming systems by reducing environmental N losses and stabilizing N within the agricultural landscape. The following four experiments investigate these conditions using a multi-scale approach, including an on-farm trial and greenhouse experiments, high-frequency assessment of greenhouse gases (GHGs), 15N pool dilution techniques, and microbial analysis. I. Greenhouse pot trial to investigate different biochar feedstocks (Status: manuscript under review): This bioassay with lettuce compared the biochar feedstocks presented in Table 1. Lettuce was cultivated for 42 days and N2O was monitored for the length of the growing season. At the end of the growing season, factors controlling N2O emissions such as gross mineralization and nitrification rates, soil pH, moisture content, and abundance of microbial genes were quantified. This study consists of six treatments (control + five biochar materials) with three replicates per treatment. II. Greenhouse pot trial to investigate N fertilization effects in biochar amended soils (Status: Ma´ nuscript preparation): Two biochar materials (WS and PC) were selected from experiment SIS based on their performance altering fluxes of N2O and combined with five N treatments (0%, 25%, 50%, 75%, and 100% of 225 kg of N ha-1). Biochar effects were evaluated during two lettuce-growing seasons on plant performance, N use efficiency, N2O emissions, and N losses via leachate. III. Laboratorial incubation to assess pH effects on denitrification (Status: Data analyses): To determine the effects of biochar on the end products of denitrification (N2 or N2O), we conducted laboratory incubations across a range of soil pH using acidic and basic pH soils. In addition to the control samples without any amendment, another set of samples will be amended with lime, which will simulate the effects of biochar on soil pH. An examination of the functional microbial groups involved with production and reduction of N2O were also included. IV. On farm field study (Status: Manuscript under review): This study was conducted at the Dixon Ridge Farms, a 12 acre-field that produces organic walnuts in Yolo County, California, USA. This certified organic farm prioritizes environment sustainability and energy efficiency. Within the range of sustainable practices employed at the farm, they use production waste (i.e., walnut shells) to produce energy through gasification, in addition to the use cover crops to supply N during the high demand period of the walnut trees. During 29 months, we monitored fluxes of carbon dioxide (CO2) and nitrous oxide (N2O) following management and precipitation events. We also estimated GHG offsets from the conversion of walnut residue into energy through gasification at the on-site walnut processing plant. The experimental design consists of a randomized complete block design with three blocks and four treatments each: biochar, biochar+compost, compost and control (no amendment) and two functional locations (tree row and tractor row). In the tractor row, measurements are taken in the center of the row and represent a location of high N inputs due to the presence of cover crops. In the tree row, measurements are taken between trees and represent a location of high irrigation water incident and N uptake by the walnut trees. Compost treatments c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> are included in the experiment because the compost is a major nutrient source for the walnut trees in organic orchards. In situ N2O flux measurements were performed weekly. Factors controlling N2O fluxes such as NH4+, NO3-, dissolved organic C, soil moisture, temperature, and pH were also monitored. Materials and methods (Main approaches used in this research) a) Biochar and soil characterization: All experiments will receive biochar at rates equivalent to 10 tons of biochar ha-1. Soil pH is measured in de-ionized water using a 1:1 (wt/ wt) ratio, with an equilibration time of 1 hr. Biochar and soil CEC measurements were performed by the method of ammonium acetate displacement. Briefly, soil samples were be saturated with sodium acetate and then washed with ammonium acetate to displace sodium ions. Finally, solution was analyzed for Na+ content (Mulvaney et al., 2004; Gaskin et al., 2008). Analytical techniques are used to characterize biochar and soil elemental composition, according to standard methods. b) In situ N2O fluxes measurement: Gas samples will be taken for seven days after major farm operations such as irrigation, fertilization, and cover crop mowing using the vented-closed-flux chamber method (Hutchinson and Mosier, 1981). Between soil management events, N2O will be collected weekly. N2O fluxes are analyzed by electron capture gas chromatography (GC-ECD). Gas concentrations will be tested for linearity (Hutchinson and Mosier, 1981) to determine the ha-1 day-1. The seasonal cumulative N2O emissions best flux and then converted to g N2OUN across the biochar materials will be calculated by interpolating the emissions between each sampling day. c) Denitrification rates: Using the denitrification inhibitor acetylene, we determined the rates N2O reduces to N2. Briefly, 25 g of dry soil was brought up to 55% water-filled pore space and incubated for 24 h before gas samples were collected. A duplicated set of samples received 10% acetylene enrichment to inhibit the reduction of N2O to N2. The excess amount of N2O quantified in acetylene enriched samples was assumed as the potentially denitrified N. d) Abundance of functional genes: Studies I and III will use real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) to estimate population densities of nitrifier and denitrifier microorganisms. Briefly, DNA will be extracted from soil samples using commercially available DNA extraxtion kits. Then, qPCR will target ammonia monooxygenase gene (amoA), NO2- reductase genes (nirK and nirS), and N2O reductase gene (nosZ) according to methods available in the literature: For amoA gene Okano et al., 2004; For nirK gene Henry et al., 2004 and Henry et al., 2005; For nirS gene Throback et al., 2004; Kandeler et al., 2006; For nosZ gene Henry et al., 2006. Equipment used o Gas chromatograph o Spectophotometer o pH meter o Total C and N analyzer o Dissolved C and N analyzer o Real-time quantitative PCR o Microcentrifuge o Nano-drop spectophotometer for nucleic-acid concentration and purity Preliminary results (with references to graphics that are uploaded in separate file) The first step of this research was to evaluate biochar produced from commonly available feed- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> stocks (Experiment I). Significant decreases in N2O fluxes were only observed in soil amended with W510, SWC and WS biochars (Fig. 1), which indicates that decreases in N2O emissions are biochar-type dependent. Emissions in the PC biochar treatment were higher than the control, but differences were not significant. Additionally, correlation analyses suggest that biochar pH and CEC predicted well the abundance of genes that encode denitrification (nirK, nirS, and nosZ) enzymes in bacteria. Within this context, increased soil pH in WS biochar amended soil likely promoted the observed increase in nosZ/nirS (N2O reducers to producers) ratio in favor of N2O reducers (Fig. 2), which can be related to the observed decreases in N2O fluxes. The assessment of N2O emissions at the farm-level evaluates the performance of the locally produced WS biochar in a 12-acre organic walnut orchard. Biochar alone decreased N2O fluxes in two out of 23 measured events, however, not with a magnitude large enough to modify annual or seasonal totals. This indicates that biochar-induced decreases in N2O fluxes may occasionally occur without significant changes in total emissions. Additionally, biochar alone or in combination with compost did not alter total CO2 emissions. The conversion of orchard waste into energy and C sequestration through biochar amendment resulted in the greatest C offsets across the evaluated processes. Discussion Preliminary data from this research show limited effects of biochar on N losses. Castaldi et al. (2011) attributed the lack of significant decreases to the high spatial variability in N2O emissions, which may also have played a substantial role in this research especially at the field scale. When comparing different types of biochar, significant effects of biochar on N2O fluxes were only detected soils amended with W510, SWC, and WS and for a short period of the growing season. For instance in soils amended with WS biochar, throughout the growing season, emissions of N2O tended to be lower compared to non-amended soil (control), although it was only statistically significant for two days. At the field scale, biochar has also shown limited effects on N2O emissions. It is possible that the effects of biochar on soil properties that influence N2O emissions, such as soil pH, are more pronounced in weathered tropical soils. Thus, given that biochar did not alter cumulative GHG emissions from soils, we conclude that, benefits from use of biochar as a strategy to decrease farm-level GHG emissions are associated with the gasification of orchard residue into energy and through biochar C sequestration. Relevant literature o Clough, T. J., Condron, L. M., Kammann, C., Müller, C., 2013. A Review of Biochar and Soil Nitrogen Dynamics. Agronomy, 3(2), 275-293. o Castaldi, S., Riondino, M., Baronti, S., Esposito, F.R., Marzaioli, R., Rutigliano, F.A., Vaccari, F.P., Miglietta, F., 2011. Impact of biochar application to a Mediterranean wheat crop on soil microbial activity and greenhouse gas fluxes. Chemosphere 85, 1464-1471. o Lehmann, J., Rillig, M., Thies, J., Masiello, C.A., Hockaday, W.C., Crowley, D., 2011. Biochar effects on soil biota: A review. Soil Biol. Biochem. 43,1812U1836. o Yanai, Y., Hatano, R., Okazaki, M., Toyota, K., 2008. Analysis of the C2H2 inhibition-based N2O production curve to characterize the N2O-reducing activity of denitrifying communities in soil. Geoderma 146, 269-276.
