Studies on development of camel milk products of high hygienic quality and safety, increasing the income and reducing health risks in Kenya The objective is to improve quality & safety of camel milk products. Knowledge of the microflora of traditional spontaneous fermentation will contribute to process improvement and new marketable products. Improving camel milk hygiene has positive impacts on food safety, health and farmer's income. In Kenya, camels play a central role as milk suppliers. Due to the advancing urbanisation, camel milk is increasingly commercialised and consumed in urban areas mainly in form of fermented milk. There are public health concerns regarding the risk of commercialised camel milk. In addition, there are considerable losses caused by frequent spoilage due to the absence of appropriate conservation methods. The overall objective of the project is to increase the added value of camel milk through development of market-oriented fermented milk products of high quality and prolonged shelf life, creating income and improving in the long term the standard of living in the region. This objective will be achieved through: (i) better knowledge on the diversity of beneficial and pa process thogenic microorganisms of traditional fermented products (e.g. sour-milk type SSusac ¸ T), development by improvement of new starter cultures and development of new marketable camel milk products (Susac-type) all based on modern food biotechnology and advanced microbiology related methods (ii) studies on the hygienic quality of camel milk at production and marketing level, and introducing simple techniques to improve the hygiene status at all levels. The expected outputs are: (i) Improved production processes and new product developments such as sour-milk (ii) Improved processing and handling technologies leading to elevated public health status, reduced food wastage and generation of additional income. (iii) Transposition of knowledge, technologies and products to other similar production and market systems in many parts of the African continent. First analysis of the diversity of microorganisms (by using modern molecular biological tools) in camel milk and spontaneously soured camel-milk revealed that various acidifying bacteria are always present as expected but also microorganisms at high titers which represent a health risk to the consumers. The sources of such problematic germs are currently investigated in Kenya in order to setup hygienic improving steps in collaboration with camel farmers. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2>
