Dynamic Management of Physically Coupled Systems of Systems The properties of the distributed management and control for large-scale interconnected systems of systems are investigated theoretically and validated in large-scale simulations of case studies in the fields of electric-grid optimisation and industrial production management. The well-being of the citizens in Europe depends on the reliable and efficient functioning of large interconnected systems, such as electric power systems, air traffic control, railway systems, large industrial production plants, etc. Such large systems consist of many interacting components, e.g. generation plants, distribution systems, and large and small consumers. The subsystems are usually managed locally and independently, according to different policies and priorities. The dynamic interaction of the locally managed components gives rise to complex behaviour and can lead to large-scale disruptions as e.g. black-outs in the electric grid. Large interconnected systems with autonomously acting sub-units are called systems of systems. DYMASOS addresses systems of systems where the elements of the overall system are coupled by flows of physical quantities, e.g. electric power, steam or hot water, materials in a chemical plant, c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> gas, potable water, etc. Within the project, new methods for the distributed management of large physically connected systems with local management and global coordination will be developed. The approaches explored are: - Modelling and control of large systems analogously to the evolution of the behaviour of populations in biological systems; - Market-like mechanisms to coordinate independent systems with local optimisation functions; - Coalition games where agents that control the subsystems dynamically group to pursue common goals. The properties of the distributed management and control techniques for large scale systems of systems are investigated theoretically and validated in large-scale simulations of case studies provided by industrial partners in the fields of electric grid management and industrial production management. From the experience gained in the case studies, conclusions will be drawn about the suitability of the proposed management and control mechanisms for certain classes of systems of systems. The expected technical outcomes of the project are: - Innovation in distributed management methods for complex interconnected systems; - Progress in methods for the rigorous analysis and validation of systems of systems; - Improvements in the management of electric grids and of large production complexes; - Tools for the engineering of management systems for systems of systems; - Identification of technology gaps in advanced management and coordination methods. The developed coordination methods will lead to improved system stability and lower resource consumption in industrial production, and in electric-power generation and distribution. This will result in a reduction of the CO2-emissions, higher competitiveness of the European industry and lower prices for the consumers. Thus, DYMASOS will contribute to the goal of a greener and more competitive Europe.
