On the Computational Security of Distributed Storage Systems We study the secrecy of distributed storage systems for passwords. Assuming that the encoder describes a password using several hints, which she stores in different locations, we quantify how hard it is for a legitimate receiver and an eavesdropper to reconstruct the password. Description: We study the secrecy of static distributed storage systems for passwords. A password X is drawn according to some PMF P. An encoder, Alice, maps (possibly using randomization) the password to a set of hints and stores them on different discs in different locations. The hints are intended for a legitimate receiver, Bob, who knows where they are stored and thus sees more hints than an eavesdropper, Eve. The network is robust against a limited number of disc failures if we assume that Bob does not see all hints. Using some notion of ambiguity, we quantify how difficult it is for Bob and Eve to reconstruct the password. Of course, we would like Bob's ambiguity about X to be small and Eve's large. There are several ways to define ambiguity. In this project, we assume that Eve wants to guess X with the least number of guesses of the form Is X = x? . We quantify Eve's ambiguity about X by the expected number of guesses that she needs to uncover X. As to Bob, we will consider two different criteria: In the guessing version of the problem the criterion is the expected number of guesses it takes Bob to guess X, and in the list version the criterion is the first moment of the size of the list that Bob must form to guarantee that it contain X. The list-size criterion can be viewed as a worst-case version of the guessing criterion: If Bob tries to guess X without knowing its PMF P, then it is reasonable for him to first guess the possible realizations of X that Alice could have mapped to the observed hints. The number of guesses that he needs is then at most the size of the smallest list that is guaranteed to contain X, and on average it is half the size of that list. Optimizing over Alice's mapping, i.e., her description of the password X, we wish to characterize the largest ambiguity that we can guarantee that Eve will have subject to a given upper bound on the ambiguity that Bob may have. Preliminary Results: For the case where the system is not robust against disc failures, i.e., when Bob sees all hints, we obtained upper and lower bounds. These bounds are asymptotically tight in the sense that they converge to the same limit when the size of the password increases. Moreover, we were able to link the different ambiguity criteria for Bob. In particular, we showed that the results for the guessing version and the list version coincide in the asymptotic setting where the size of the password is large. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> Discussion: The static distributed storage system has been studied for the case where the password is uniformly drawn and Eve's observation must satisfy some information-theoretic security criterion. Our setting is closer to practice in that the PMF P of X need not be uniform and in that, using some notion of ambiguity, we quantify how difficult it is for Bob and Eve to reconstruct X. Relevant Literature: A. Subramanian and S. W. McLaughlin, TMDS codes on the erasureerasure wiretap channel,T arXiv:0902.3286 [cs.IT], 2009. N. Cai and R. W. Yeung, TSecure network coding on a wiretap network,T IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, IT-57, No. 1, pp. 424U435, Jan. 2011. S. El Rouayheb, E. Soljanin, and A. Sprintson, TSecure network coding for wiretap networks of type II,T IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, IT-58, No. 3, pp. 1361U1371, Mar. 2012. N. Merhav and E. Arikan, TThe Shannon cipher system with a guessing IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, IT-45, No. 6, pp. 1860U1866, wiretapper,T Sep. 1999. Proc. of IEEE Int. Symp. on Inf. J. L. Massey, TGuessing and entropy,T Theory (ISIT), p. 204, Jun. 1994. E. Arikan, TAn inequality on guessing and its applications to sequential IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, IT-42, No. 1, pp. 99U105, decoding,T Jan. 1996. IEEE C. Bunte and A. Lapidoth, TEncoding tasks and Rt'enyi entropy,T Trans. Inf. Theory, IT-60, No. 9, pp. 5065U5076, Sep. 2014. S. Arimoto, TInformation measures and capacity of order a for discrete memoryless channels,T Topics in Inf. Theory, Vol. 17, No. 6, pp. 41-52, 1977. IEEE Trans. E. Arikan and N. Merhav, TGuessing subject to distortion,T Inf. Theory, IT-44, No. 3, pp. 1041U1056, May 1998.
