Sedimentologic, Petrophysical and Seismic Record of Late Quaternary Environmental Change in the Lowland Neotropics: Lake Petén-Itza Drilling Project, Guatemala. This project funds part of deep drilling operation at several sites into the more than 100 m-thick lacustrine sediment record of Lake Petén-Itza in the neotropical lowlands of Northern Guatemala, yielding a paleoenvironmental record back to or beyond the last interglacial ~ period at 120'000 yrs B.P Summary Together with two matching proposals submitted to international funding agencies [International Continental Deep Drilling Program (ICDP) and US-National Science Foundation (NSF)], this ETH proposal seeks funds to drill and core a transect of several sites into the more than 100 m-thick lacustrine sediment record of Lake Petén-Itza in the neotropical lowlands of Northern Guatemala. These sediments will likely contain a paleoenvironmental record spanning back to or beyond the ~ last interglacial period at 120'000 yrs B.P., providing unprecedented information on climate variability in the tropics of the Americas. With its maximum water depth of 160 m, extending 50 m below modern sea level, Lake Petén Itza is the best candidate in the entire Neotropics for obtaining a continuous sediment record over such an extended time span. The main goals of this drilling campaign will be to determine the: - paleoclimatic history of the northern lowland Neotropics on orbital to suborbital time scales emphasizing marine-terrestrial linkages with nearby records. - paleoecology and biogeography of the Maya tropical lowland forest including the history of vegetation change and disturbance by humans, climate change, and fire. - biogeochemical cycling in deep lake sediments emphasizing integrated studies of microbiology, geochemistry (interstitial waters), and mineral authigenesis/diagenesis. Two Swiss-funded geophysical site surveys were conducted to elucidate the sediment distribution in the lake: (1) an ETH-funded high-resolution pilot seismic campaign in 1999; and (2) Swiss National Science Foundation (SNF)-funded deep penetrating airgun survey in 2002. These surveys have provided crucial data for identifying optimal coring sites to recover the highest-quality and oldest sedimentary sections possible in the basin. On the basis of these seismic data, previous paleolimnologic work, and piston core analysis, drilling in Peten-Itza is expected to produce a suite of sediment cores that will permit an international team of geoscientists to address the main objectives described above. While a portion of the requested ETH budget will contribute directly to the drilling operations, a major part of the budget will be used to support an ETH-PhD student. In the first phase of the project (i.e., Phase I), the student will investigate the sedimentology and petrophysical nature of a set of Kullenberg piston cores taken in Lake Peten-Itza in 2002. The aim is to link these physical properties to the high-resolution seismic data obtained in 1999 and thereby calibrate the seismic stratigraphy. In Phase II, the student will be directly involved in the new drilling campaign and analyze cores, wire line logging data, and airgun seismic data to achieve complete core-log-seismic c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> integration. Because Switzerland is not, as yet, a member country of ICDP, the requested direct drilling contribution from ETH towards the ICDP drilling will ensure the participation of ETH scientists in the international scientific party chosen to participate in drilling and shorebased operations in Petén. This participation will give the ETH geologists access to cores and data obtained by the drilling project. Both Anselmetti and McKenzie are also among the seven principal investigators responsible for the drilling proposal, which is being submitted concurrently to ICDP. Goals, milestones and expected output The main objective of the Petén-Itza Drilling Project is to recover continuous, high-quality sediment cores and pore fluids that will serve as the raw materials for scientific investigations by an international team of researchers. These sediment archives will be used to test hypotheses related to three broad scientific themes: Paleoclimatic history of the lowland Neotropics on orbital to suborbital time scales emphasizing marine-terrestrial linkages. Recovery of long continuous lacustrine archives from Lake Petén-Itza will permit a number of hypotheses to be tested related to abrupt variability in temperature and humidity in the lowland Neotropics during the last deglaciation, glacial maximum, Marine Isotope Stage (MIS) 3, and possibly beyond to the last interglacial. Comparison of the lacustrine Petén-Itza record (located at 17oN) with the marine record from Cariaco Basin (located at 11oN) will help establish the geographic extent and relevance of abrupt humidity changes in the northern Neotropics. Long late Pleistocene sequences will be useful for testing hypotheses related to the response of the northern lowland Neotropics to long-term forcing by orbitally-induced solar insolation changes. Paleoecology and biogeography of the Maya tropical lowland forest including the history of vegetation change and disturbance by humans, climate change, and fire. Although the Maya forest is the largest continuous expanse of tropical forest remaining in Central America and Mexico, it experienced widespread deforestation during the period of Preclassic and Classic -Maya occupati~ on (1000 B.C. to 900 A.D.). A long sequence from Petén-Itza would permit a comparative study of pollen for the Holocene and older interglacial periods to assess human versus climatic impact on the tropical lowland forest. Knowledge of the sensitivity and resilience of this tropical lowland environment to disturbance is societally relevant because the Maya forest has recently been iden of deforestation and biotic diversity loss today. tified as a Shot ¸ spotT Biogeochemical cycling in deep lake sediments emphasizing integrated studies of microbiology, geochemistry (interstitial waters), and mineral authigenesis/diagenesis. Geomicrobiology constitutes a strong complementary aspect to the other objectives of the Lake Petén-Itza Drilling Project and will constitute one of the first comprehensive investigations into the microbial ecology and dominant geomicrobiological mediated processes occurring in deep subsurface lacustrine sediments. The program will address the role of microbes in the genesis and diagenesis of authigenic carbonates (dolomite, calcite, aragonite) and other mineral phases (e.g., gypsum, pyrite), and their implications for other studies (e.g., stable isotopes, magnetostratigraphy, U/Th dating, etc.). The specific goals and milestones for the ETH-PhD student project are as follows: c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> ETH-PhD Phase I: The Holocene depositional sequence in the piston cores taken from Lake PeténItza in 2002 will be analyzed to determine the depositional regime, in particular sedimentology, sedimentary structures, provenance and mineralogy, as well as the petrophysical signature. The major goal is to identify the source and major processes responsible for the deposition of the socalled Maya Clay , a formation with a significantly increased inorganic detrital component that is coincident with occupation of the watershed by the Maya Civilization. It has been hypothesized that the Maya Clay was deposited as a result of anthropogenic deforestation and land-use change, which increased runoff and sediment transport to the lake, but archeologic surveys have indicated that population densities peaked after the major pulses of soil erosion occurred. In fact, detailed sedimentological studies of this unit and the over- and underlying organic-rich gyttja deposits have not been undertaken to test the hypothesis of a purely anthropogenic cause. By investigating the sedimentology and the petrophysical signature of the Holocene stratigraphic section, and by linking it to the seismic record, a volumetric analysis of the Maya Clay will be made that will be used to quantify soil erosion rates before, during, and after the period of Maya occupation. ETH-PhD Phase II: The main goal of this phase is to utilize the drill cores to study the long-term sedimentation history in Lake Petén-Itza, and reconstruct the physical depositional regime through time. This will be used to establish how sedimentation responded to paleoclimatic changes on a longer time scale. The calibration between surface processes in the Petén-Itza catchment and the lacustrine sedimentary processes obtained during Phase I will be applied to the older sedimentary sequences, which will span multiple stadial-interstadial and glacial/interglacial cycles. Special emphasis will be given to the potential occurrence of units high in inorganic detrital components prior to the period of human occupation, which could be non-anthropogenic analogs of the late Holocene Maya Clay. If such units were found in the late Pleistocene section, for example, then they would call into question the purely anthropogenic origin of the late Holocene Maya Clay. The studentSs task will be to achieve an integration of sedimentological and petrophysical (in particular wire line log) data that will be correlated to the seismic stratigraphic study. Similar to the Holocene study of Phase I, the core-log-seismic correlation will allow a quantification of these depositional processes. Eventually, the lacustrine depositional products can be linked to the surface processes in the catchment area, with both systems directly coupled to the paleoenvironmental evolution. The entire PhD project will be thematically integrated with the ongoing SNF-sponsored assistant professor research program of the principal investigator, which has the overall topic of Quantification of Lacustrine Sedimentation .
