Improving resilience in food systems In order to ensure food security for the global population, despite multiple shocks ranging from climate change to economic crises, food systems need to be resilient. We develop practical approaches for decision-makers to design resilience in food systems. T ¸ Description Food systems are increasingly exposed to drivers of change, ranging from sudden shocks to longterm stressors, such as natural disasters, pest outbreaks, economic and political crises, climate change, resource degradation, etc. Furthermore, food systems are complex and comprise different processes, value chains, actors and interactions. Under so much uncertainty and complexity, how can we make food systems more resilient and provide sufficient and accessible food for all and in the long term? The overall objective of this project is to develop a holistic approach to assess and improve the resilience of food systems, including its multiple actors and dimensions, against potential shocks. The research approach includes two complementary steps: based on literature review, semi-qualitative guidelines are developed for the screening of relevant issues. In a second step, case studies are conducted at different scales (national, international, commodity-wise) and complemented by stakeholder consultations and system dynamics modelling. This will enable the development of measurable and validated resilience indicators which can be used to quantitatively assess resilience in food systems as part of an assessment toolkit. These guidelines and toolkit will be public and feasible in practice with minimal support. The two levels allow flexible application in contexts with different resource availabilities. The guidelines and toolkit are expected to directly contribute to food systems resilience, by supporting decision-making in practice. In addition, this project will generate a database of knowledge, empirical data, and experience in food systems resilience through case studies. It will contribute to an extended resilience mind-set of stakeholders and future food system leaders, through stakeholder participation in the case studies, and academic education activities. It will further contribute to food systems resilience by creating connections between stakeholders, and supporting knowledge and information exchange. Materials and methods Case studies, participatory methods (interviews, workshops, possibly companion modelling), framework for designing food system resilience, indicators of food system resilience Equipment used None Preliminary results (with references to graphics that are uploaded in separate file) Based on an extensive literature review of food systems, food security, and the resilience concept, we define food system resilience as the capacity to capacity over time of a food system and its units at multiple levels, to provide sufficient, appropriate and accessible food to all, in the face of various and even unforeseen disturbances. We have likewise established a preliminary dataset of food system resilience indicators, and a beta version of guidelines for designing food system resilience (Figure 1), which we have tested on two theoretical case studies: the sugar value chain in Switzerland (Zweifel 20
