Buckling and flexural buckling of steel columns in fire The research project aims at analyzing the fire resistance of rectangular hollow sections and I-profiles subjected to axial compression as well as combined axial compression and uniaxial bending. Local and global buckling have a strong influence on the resistance of steel structures subjected to fire. Due to elevated temperatures under fire conditions, the strength and stiffness of carbon steel decreases rapidly, and the typical elastic ideal-plastic stress-strain relationship becomes distinctly non-linear. Therefore, local and global buckling in fire conditions need to be considered according to a wider range of cross-sectional and global slenderness than in ambient temperature design. Commonly used calculation formulae for local and global buckling used in fire design often consider the decrease of the strength and stiffness of steel at elevated temperatures but adopt the design methods developed for ambient temperature design and linear-elastic perfectly-plastic material behaviour. However, numerical studies show that a simple adaptation of the ambient temperature design methods produces unreliable and sometimes even unsafe results. In particular, the influence of local buckling on the cross-sectional resistance and the structural behaviour of steel columns subjected to fire has to be taken into account for more cross-sections than in ambient temperature design. A fundamental approach based on extensive research of the problem is necessary. The results of a former research project and a strain-based design approach developed at our institute constitute the basis for the calculation of the cross-sectional capacity of steel sections subjected to fire. The intension is to develop a calculation model for steel cross-sections (rectangular hollow sections and I-profiles) subjected to axial compression and combined compression and major axis bending and fire. This model will allow taking into account local and global buckling, local-global buckling interaction as well as the non-linear stress-strain relationship of steel in fire. The procedure of the research can be summarised as follows: - To perform stub-column tests and column tests at elevated temperatures in order to analyse the cross-sectional behaviour and the overall structural behaviour of open steel section subjected to compression and combined compression and major axis bending in fire using an electric furnace. - To extend the knowledge about the local and global buckling behaviour of steel members subjected to fire by performing a numerical parametric study. - To develop a safe, economic and easily applicable calculation model for the cross-sectional resistance as well as steel members in axial compression and combined compression and major axis bending subjected to fire.
