Temperature Fluctuations in Fluid and Pipe Walls induced by Turbulent Mixing Mixing of fluids with different temperatures result in temperature fluctuations in walls of components of power plants that cause thermal fatigue. The ability of Reynolds Stress Models coupled with a Temperature Fluctuation Transport Model to predict the amplitude of the fluctuations is explored. Turbulent mixing of streams with different temperature may result in significant temperature fluctuations in the walls of pipes and other components of power plants or other industrial installations. These fluctuations may cause thermal fatigue in the wall material and pose the risk of a failure of the component. This is an important, internationally recognized issue particularly for the plant life-time management of existing nuclear power plants, where possible life-time extensions must be based on reliable analyses of the progress of ageing of safety-relevant components. Sometimes, components have to be replaced and back-fitting measures have to be designed in order to reduce cyclic thermal loads on structures. In all those cases, a reliable prediction of the mixing processes is extremely important. Other industrial areas clearly benefit from the results of studies in this field, too. The project is focused on the prediction of temperature fluctuations in a T-junction by techniques of experimental simulation and a contribution to the theoretical prediction for arbitrary geometries by means of an extension and validation of Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) modeling. For the experimental part, a co-operation with the Laboratory of Nuclear Power (IKE) of the University of Stuttgart has been established. IKE has started to develop and construct a T-junction experiment that will provide measuring data on the velocity and temperature fields inside the flow domain at operating parameters of an original nuclear power plant for the first time. High parameters pose a number of limitations to the applicability of measuring methods. For this reason, temperature information will be obtained only at a limited number of locations by the use of thermocouples. To get access to high-resolution information on the fluctuations, a second test facility is under construction to perform complementary mixing experiments at room temperature. Density differences occurring in the test setup of IKE due to the high temperature differences will be modeled by the dosing of additives that increase density of one of the mixing streams in the cold, non-pressurized model. Mesh sensor techniques based on detection of electrical conductivity will be used instead of thermocouples. These sensors provide two-dimensional distributions of the transport scalar at hundreds of individual measuring positions with a time resolution of up to 10 kHz and are from this c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> point o view extremely superior to thermocouples. The temperature as transport scalar is simulated by an addition of a tracer salt that increases the electrical conductivity of the fluid. In this way, mixing patterns become visible to mesh sensors. As an alternative, it is planned to detect temperature fluctuations directly via the temperature dependency of the electrical conductivity of water, which is less accurate but opens the door to non-adiabatic tests at the cold, non-pressurized test rig. Two types of sensors will be used in parallel. The first type consists in a pair of wire grids span over the cross-section of the T-junction downstream of the side-branch connection. This sensor can acquire two-dimensional distributions of the transport scalar on a measuring plane perpendicular to the flow direction. In this way, transient mixing patterns will be available from the complete flow cross-section. The second type consists in an electrode matrix mounted flush to the inner wall of the duct. It provides time-resolved distributions of the transport scalar very close to the wall. With an effective distance of about 0.1 mm, this measurement will provide information about the transport scalar inside the boundary layer. Additional instrumentation with temperature gauges is foreseen as well. Beside flow instrumentation, the IKE T-junction is equipped with strain gauges, too. Tests in Stuttgart will be performed until failure of the tested component, which allows mechanical testing of the fragments. It is a considerable added value of the proposed exchange of experimental results that also the data of the structural behavior will be made available. The theoretical part of the project aims at predicting temperature fluctuations by means of steadystate RANS simulations. The prediction of temperature fluctuations in a wall that is exposed to the temperature patterns generated by turbulent mixing within the fluid usually requires timeresolved solutions of the Navier-Stokes equations coupled with a heat conduction model of the wall. Currently, most of the efforts in this field are focused on large eddy simulations (LES). These calculations provide temperature histories in the fluid, which allow to determinate both the amplitude and the power spectrum of the fluctuations. The coupling with an unsteady heat conduction equation (conjugate heat transfer) in the wall allows furthermore to predict the temperature histories in the wall material. The post-processing of the calculated time-dependent data yields the required temperatures and its RMS values as well as the frequency spectrum of the fluctuations. The application of steady-state RANS methods is interesting from a practical point of view: LES, which has been found to be the ideal tool to predict the temperature fluctuations, has limits when more complex and larger geometries typical for industrial plants have to be analyzed. Existing LES applications are focused on the mixing phenomenon in T junctions where the huge computational efforts connected with this approach are still bearable. For more complex geometries it is desirable to search for alternative methods based on more efficient steady-state RANS models. A promising approach consists in the application of the so-called temperature fluctuation transport model, which can be coupled to a Reynolds stress model. The model is based on a second averaging of the scalar transport equation, which results in additional transport equations for the RMS of the scalar, i.e. the temperature, and the turbulent diffusion terms, which are averaged products of the temperature fluctuations with the fluctuations of each of the components of the velocity vector. In our previous work, it has been demonstrated that this approach reduces computational costs compared to LES by orders of magnitude. Still, with this technique it is possible to obtain distributions of the RMS of the fluid temperature. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> Numerical simulations aiming at a validation of this model are carried out using the commercial CFD-code ANSYS CFX 12, which offers the option to activate the temperature fluctuation model. First calculations, carried out with this commercial code resulted in a qualitatively correct prediction of the profiles of the RMS of the transport scalar in an adiabatic mixing experiment GEMIX performed earlier at PSI (Fig. 1). It was found that among the available Reynolds Stress Models, BSL performs better than SSG. The compression of the mixing layer in case of a stable density stratification was predicted correctly. Calculated fluctuation amplitudes are in general somewhat smaller than the once measured by a wire-mesh sensor in the salt tracer mixing tests. On the basis of distributions of the temperature RMS, complex geometries can be screened in order to identify locations where high amplitudes of temperature fluctuations may endanger the integrity of the mechanical structures. For a subsequent fatigue analysis, it is of crucial importance to be able to provide estimates of the temperature fluctuations in the wall and their frequency range. The student will therefore explore the feasibility of methods for an approximate determination of the time scale of turbulent mixing patterns found in the fluid and a simplified modeling of the response of the temperature field in the wall. It is clear that a direct solution of the conjugate heat transfer problem cannot yield the temperature fluctuations in the wall in steady-state calculations. An approximate assessment of the damping in the boundary layer and inside the wall has to be elaborated, which is based on analytical transfer functions for the propagation of temperature fluctuations.
