Q-Factor Enhancement in Resonating CNTs This project will explore the fabrication and operation of suspended carbon nanotube resonators in ambient conditions, and investigate damping and fluctuation mechanism of SWNT mechanical resonance. To achieve sustained resonance at ambient conditions, the SWNTs are subjected to tensile loading. The objective of this project is to study the mechanical resonance of SWNTs at room temperature (low pressure) and transfer the obtained knowledge to potentially enable high Q resonance at ambient conditions (RT, ambient pressure), which to our knowledge has not been yet been successfully demonstrated. Resonant sensors based on nanomaterials like SWNTs have the potential to achieve unprecedented sensitivities and resolution, thereby allowing innovation in areas like analytics, medicine, smart infrastructure and industrial instrumentation. The two main factors influencing the performance of SWNT resonance are (a) the decreasing of the Q-factor with increasing pressure and temperature and (b) the effect of frequency fluctuation brought about by resonance mode coupling and Brownian motion. This project seeks to address these difficulties by fabricating new MEMS based devices to then study the specific damping and fluctuation mechanisms of the system. It was demonstrated that the quality of the SWNT is of utmost importance and therefore a transfer process is incorporated. When a SWNT is subjected to axial strain higher Q-factors can be obtained, a concept that has already been proved in our group. The devices will allow both electrostatic as well as mechanical actuation for damping mechanism studying and multi-gate structures for selective mode actuation. To further investigate the performance of the device, a new electrical set-up as well as measurement methods will be investigated. In conclusion this project aims at both, developing a fabrication process of a pristine SWNT resonator for Q-tuning and experimentation and characterization of resonance behavior to obtain a better physical understanding of loss and fluctuation mechanism. The motivation of the project is to be able to tune the SWNT parameters to reach higher Q-factor regimes, which in turn would be the first step towards future industrial applications of mechanically resonating SWNT sensors.
