Numerical investigation of frustrated magnets Frustrated magnets, show rich and complex phase diagrams due to competing interactions. The physics causing this interesting behavior makes analytic approaches difficult and numerical methods are essential. Frustrated magnets with competing interactions show fascinatig and exotic behavior. Competing interactions can give rise to exotic phases and complex phase diagrams. Since the frustration makes the otherwise very powerful quantum Monte Carlo simulations hard to apply, we also use other numerical algorithms such as exact diagonalization, density matrix renormalization group or series expansions. Below we give an overview over some of the projects. The quadrumerized Shastry-Sutherland model defines a strongly frustrated two-dimensional spin1/2 Heisenberg model, which in special cases reduces to various models for which exact analytical and quantum Monte Carlo results can be obtained. We used exact-diagonalization in combination with a bond-operator mean field theory to explore the phases of the model throughout parameterspace and analysed the nature of the various phase transitions. This study allowed us to conclude that in the original Shastry-Sutherland model a finite region exists, where a valence bond solid is realized. In this gapfull regime the two-spin correlations are shortranged, but long range order exists in four-spin correlation functions along with a two-fold degenerate quantum ground state manifold. The square lattice quantum Heisenberg antiferromagnet with cyclic exchange interactions induces a novel and interesting, previously conjectured but not proven phase, with spin nematic order, partially breaking the SU(2) symmetry of the Heisenberg model. Given the problems of directly simulating frustrated quantum magnets, a promising approach is to search for simpler effective model. One candidate class are quantum dimer model, in which dimers living on the bonds of the lattice represent nearest neighbor spin singlets, a common local structure in frustrated magnets. Before searching for explicit mapings from quantum magnets to dimer models it is of interest to determine the phase diagrams of quantum dimer models, and their classical equivalents. Recent theoretical studies raised the possibility of a realization of spin nematic states in the S=1 triangular lattice compound NiGa2S4. We study the bilinear-biquadratic spin 1 Heisenberg chain in a zig-zag geometry by means of Density Matrix Renormalization Group (DMRG) and Exact c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> Diagonalization (ED). We present the phase diagram focusing on antiferromagnetic interactions. Adjacent to the known Haldane / double Haldane and the extended critical phase with dominant spin nematic correlations we find a trimerized phase with a non-vanishing energy gap. We discuss results for different order parameters, energy gaps, correlation functions and the central charge, and make connection to field theoretical predictions for the phase diagram.
