Open the Book of Nature The AGORA communication project ,,Open the Book of Nature" creates a stage for interaction between scientists and citizens in order to raise awareness and understanding of the impacts of climate and environmental change, namely in Switzerland, but also in other parts of the world. The AGORA communication project ,,Open the Book of Nature" creates a stage for interaction between scientists and citizens in order to raise awareness and understanding of the impacts of climate and environmental change, namely in Switzerland, but also in other parts of the world. The website ,,Book-of-Nature" will involve the public through participation and discussion. Applying a ,,Citizen science" approach to climate change impacts, the audience will collect field observations and photographs in four Book Chapters or topics: plants, animals, landscapes, climate; and scientists in return will provide observation guidelines and scientific information and interpretation to the public. The ,,Open the Book of Nature" project will raise awareness by - animating persons with little access to science to explore their environment with simple methods - educating these persons about impacts of climate and environmental change in Switzerland and other parts of the world - engaging these persons in discussions and making them part of a scientific process that involves leading Swiss scientists and leading Swiss research institutions. The ,,Open the Book of Nature" project will deliver - a collaboration concept to assure widely-supported features, technical compatibility - a website ,,Book-of-Nature" including a content management system with efficient editorial information handling - a social media site for presenting information and fostering discussions The project will benefit from experience gained in ongoing, similar projects in other countries and will adapt and develop communication methods and strategies that specifically address the Swiss target audience. In contrast to similar projects in large countries, the Swiss target audience is expected to have little understanding of how a small country with a small population is affedted by large-scale effects of global change. The project is structured in three annual time slices with specific aims for each year: in year 1 the proposed communication concept will be refined and contacts with existing national and international programs will be established or intensified; year 2 will be devoted to establishing the project activities in a prototyping phase consisting of an implementation phase and internal testing phase; and in year 3 the public launch will involve the target audience via a testing phase followed by an evaluation phase. In this project a well-established network of climate change researchers is supported by communication experts in print and web-content journalism, as well as by internet graphics and technical designers. ,,Open the Book of Nature" builds on strong existing partnerships in Switzerland under c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> the auspices of the Swiss Academy of Natural Sciences SCNAT and the Federal Department of Environment (FOEN).
