Doppler Imaging of IM Pegasi in Support of the Gravity Probe B Mission Gravity Probe B is the relativity gyroscope experiment developed by NASA/Stanford to test unverified predictions of Einstein's general theory of relativity: space curvature and frame dragging effect. Our participation in the mission is to provide the best knowledge on the guide star in the optical. The overall objective of the project is to provide optical support for the NASA/Stanford Gravity Probe B mission (GP-B). Gravity Probe B is the relativity gyroscope experiment having been developed by NASA and Stanford University to test two extraordinary, unverified predictions of Albert Einstein's general theory of relativity. The experiment will check, very precisely, tiny changes in the direction of spin of four gyroscopes contained in an Earth satellite orbiting at 640 km altitude directly over the poles. The gyroscopes will measure how space and time are warped by the presence of the Earth, and, more profoundly, how the Earth's rotation drags space-time around with it. These effects, though small for the Earth, have far-reaching implications for the nature of matter and the structure of the Universe. Our participation in the mission is to provide the best knowledge on the guide star in the optical. IM Peg has been chosen as a guide star for the mission telescope, which must remain fixed on the center of the star. Any nonzero trend during the mission in the offset between the optical centroid of the light of the primary and its center of mass should be known with a standard error less than 0.5 milliarcseconds/year. The star shows, however, a high level of magnetic activity which is expressed, for instance, in large cool magnetic regions on the stellar surface (see the figure attached). Cool regions on the stellar surface radiate lower continuum flux as compared to the hotter photosphere and, thus, distort the position of the optical center of the stellar disk. Moreover, due to stellar rotation and spot evolution, the offset of the optical center varies on time scales of one stellar rotation, months, and years. In order to provide estimates of the optical offset due to spots, the spot distribution on the surface of IM Peg will be monitored during the mission with the help c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> of the Doppler imaging technique, which provides images of the stellar surface, from which the offsets of the optical center will be calculated. The Doppler imaging technique is used to extract the information about the surface brightness of the stellar disk which is encoded in time varying spectral line profiles of rotating stars. Cool regions on the stellar surface radiate lower continuum flux, as compared to the hotter photosphere, and so distort the shapes of rotationally broadened profiles of spectral lines. Since the star is rotating sufficiently rapidly that the rotational broadening of the line profile is significantly larger than the local line profile at any single point on the stellar surface, a cool spot on the stellar surface causes a distortion of the profile. The radial velocity at which the distortion is observed is defined by the position of the cool spot, while its size is proportional to the spot's size. As the star rotates, the distortion moves across the profile, with the amplitude depending on the spot latitude. For instance, spots near the stellar equator will produce a distortion that is only visible for half the rotational cycle of the star and that migrates with time from the extreme blue wing of the line profile to the extreme red. Higher latitude spots produce distortions that may be visible at all times and that migrate back and forth near line center as the star rotates. A time series of the temperaturesensitive atomic line profiles observed over a full stellar rotation thus contains information about the spot distribution on the stellar surface. This distribution is inferred using an inversion technique resulting in a map, or image, of the stellar surface. The inversion technique requires the knowledge of the stellar atmospheric and geometric parameters as well as atomic data for the analyzed spectral lines. The stellar parameters of the primary of IM Peg and orbital parameters of the binary are known from our earlier studies (see the publications affiliated with the project). Spectral line parameters in the wavelength range of the echelle spectra need to be collected from the available databases and checked with the help of the solar spectrum or spectra of standard stars. Atomic data for two major spectral regions at 617 nm and 705.5 nm have been already collected. An algorithm and a numerical computer code for our inversion technique have already been developed and successfully employed to obtain images of IM Peg for the years 1996-1999. The technique allows us to obtain images in terms of effective temperatures of stellar atmosphere models and provides error estimates for our solutions. The temperature scale of the images can be checked against the observed strength of molecular bands, which are formed only inside cool spots, and also against photometric data obtained simultaneously with the spectroscopic observations.
