Negotiating Climate Change The project SNegotiating ¸ Climate ChangeT sources and the bargaining strategies by member states in the ongoing UNFCCC negotiations . The study aims for a systematic analysis of resources, bargaining strategies and their influencing factors in environment negotiations. Project summary Negotiating Climate change U The project Negotiating Climate Change investigates the power resources and the choice of bargaining strategies by member states in the current United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) negotiations leading to the Post-Kyoto process. While several studies have described the functioning of negotiations at the UNFCCC, so far there is no systematic analysis of power resources of negotiating member delegations, of their bargaining strategies and of the factors which influence their choice of these bargaining strategies. While power resources are defined as assets which enable an actor to achieve goals, e.g. voting power, economic power, and negotiation skills (i.e. exogenous determinants of success which are difficult or even impossible to change at least in the short run), bargaining strategies cover the different ways of interaction with other players. In this context, we are particularly interested in (A) the determinants of successful negotiation (including specific characteristics and behavioural attributes of the negotiators) and (B) the determinants of the choice of any particular negotiation strategy (and position) by these negotiators. Currently, an investigation of climate change negotiations is highly relevant for both scholars and practitioners, since the ongoing climate negotiations are at a key stage determining the future after the Kyoto Protocol. In the face of new scientific developments on the climate issue and increasing public pressure on politicians concerning the environment, knowledge about power resources and the choice of bargaining strategies as well as their effect are of great importance. Further, negotiations about climate change may also lend themselves to a reconsideration of the potential role of developing countries in the negotiation process. As opposed to what we observe in the context of other international negotiations, some economically extremely weak developing states such as Tuvalu are treated as serious negotiation partners. This may be related to their intelligent choice of coalition partners like NGOs, and to the fact that their existence is at stake if emission reduction fails, a fact for which many people in developed countries can be expected to hold their own governments responsible. In order to systematically measure positions and strategies at the beginning of the negotiations and the success of negotiators at the end of the negotiation process, we will conduct interviews with negotiators, UNFCCC officials, and negotiation observers both before and after the Copenhagen Conference of the Parties in December 2009. This will allow us to control for a possible change of negotiation strategies of the most crucial negotiators as well as to gather any missing data from the first round of interviews. Since the UNFCCC negotiations are very well documented, the interview information can also be supplemented and controlled with text analysis of negotiation documents. The number of negotiation participants and negotiation issues will allow us to test whether and under which conditions power resources on the one hand, and the use of specific negotiation strategies on the other hand, are more effective in achieving negotiation goals, by using multivariate statistical analyses. A second step of our study will investigate which domestic variables can explain the choice of strategies and negotiation positions using case studies. In particular partisan orientation or domestic interest groups are possible explanatory factors. If evidence from our observation of past climate negotiation rounds is substantiated in the first part of our analysis, particularly interesting countries for our case studies could be Tuvalu, Russia and India. Tuvalu is a very small country, but with strong salience, and it is generally recognized as a unusually relevant player as compared to its size. India is one of the two major emerging economies strongly under pressure to accept targets due to its increasingly large emissions (along with China). Being a poor country in terms of per capita income, they strongly oppose this pressure so that its negotiation strategy will be of high c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> interest. Its position may even influence overall targets for post 2012 emission reductions. Finally, Russia has played a crucial role for the entry into force of the Kyoto Protocol, and played a very ambiguous role in this context, very difficult to understand from a rational choice perspective as long as the national political economy remains unconsidered. Our analysis will contribute to ongoing research on power resources and strategies in international institutions and their decision-making processes. Given the strong salience of climate change for many developing countries, we specifically aim at deriving the determinants of successful negotiation strategies for these countries. While they are traditionally looked at as weaker players given that their power resources are limited, climate change negotiations provide evidence for a number of exceptions to this rule. Analysing regularities behind successful bargaining strategies in this context should thus allow us to derive some more general policy advice for developing country negotiators. These potential gains are possible due to a collaboration of economists, political scientists, psychologists, and policy experts on climate change and development in order to cover all aspects of climate change negotiations. Team members and affiliations Prof. Dr. Katharina Michaelowa, project coordinator Center for Comparative and International Studies, Institute of Political Science, University of Zurich Prof. Dr. Stefanie Bailer, co-coordinator Center for Comparative and International Studies, ETH Zurich Dr. Axel Michaelowa, co-coordinator Center for Comparative and International Studies, Institute of Political Science, University of Zurich Paula Castro, principal member Center for Comparative and International Studies, Institute of Political Science, University of Zurich Florian Weiler, principal member Center for Comparative and International Studies, ETH Zurich Prof. Dr. Liliana Andonova, associated member Graduate Institute for International Studies, Geneva Christoph Bals, associated member Germanwatch Bettina Ryf, associated member Department of Psychology, University of Zurich
