Aluminium Stabilised Cables for Very Large Superconducting Magnets Under the leadership of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETHZ) an international ad hoc collaboration has carried out R&D for superconducting detector magnets for CERN. In a first step an aluminium stabilised test conductor for the ATLAS and CMS detector magnets was produced. In the past two years further progress could be achieved. After the production of the first length of 200 m conductor for the ATLAS racetrack coil, a new method was developed by means of the Conform process. With this process we could manufacture conductors for the FermiLab D I detector and for the Belle detector at KEK/Japan. Further work was carried out for the second ATLAS racetrack conductor, for the BABAR detector in collaboration with INFN Italy as well as for the CMS insert conductor just recently. For high performance superconducting magnets as used in large detectors (High Energy Physics) or magnetic storage devices (SMES), the mechanical stresses on the conductor go beyond the yield stress level of the high purity matrix stabiliser. Therefore a novel method is proposed to join high strength aluminium strips to the high purity aluminium stabiliser by using the electron-beam welding. The proposed EB-welding combined with roll-pressing under vacuum provides the minimum heat input on the conductor in comparison with other welding techniques. This methods provides the advantage to allow the production of endless conductor lengths and includes the potentiality of repairing without loosing expensive material. As this process has to be adapted to the high purity aluminium on the one side and to the high strength material on the other, we started in a first step with investigation and development of the process, using standard laboratory machines together with laboratory - size tooling. Finally, quality control measurements on mechanical bonding between aluminium stabiliser and superconducting cable have been developed. Further R&D is needed to investigate non-destructive testing on on-line measurements during cable manufacturing on both aluminium - superconductor and stabiliser - reinforcement bonding. A further very important question is to know the electrical resistivity of the stabiliser. High purity aluminium as used for aluminium stabilised superconducting cable achieves very low resistivity even at high magnetic fields. However, the resistivity is also very strain dependent. In superconducting magnets, especially in case of SMES magnets, a strain induced increase of the resistivity after only few cycles of the magnet can be observed. Measurements on two types of the c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> best candidate aluminium purities have been carried out.
