Robust Precision Control of the Swiss Free Electron Laser The project will develop and implement techniques for the modeling, con- trol and coordination of the radio frequency beam acceleration structures. High precision robust control is essential for the performance of the Swiss Free Electron Laser. Operation of the Swiss Free Electron Laser depends upon the performance parameters of the high energy pulsed electron beam. The pulse-to-pulse stability of the electron beam characteristics (charge, beam energy and spread, bunch length, and emittance) are critical to the quality of laser pulses required for the scientific goals. Control of the electron beam is a challenging task due to: RF pulse lengths close to the bandwidth limits of current control technologies; variational sensitivity in the RF structures (due to thermal and other effects); klystron operation close to capability; and the use of nonlinear RF pulse compressors to achieve very high accelerating field energies. The control system modeling, analysis and design challenges will require the development of novel theory and methods, particularly in relation to the RF-controlled electron-beam application domain. We propose a research program to investigate and solve the control challenges that will face the SwissFEL project. The effort will establish a collaboration between Prof. Roy Smith and the Automatic Control Laboratory, ETH, Zürich, and the Paul Scherrer Institute. The majority of the work will directly involve the Low-Level RF control group which will act as the focus of the research within PSI. The research component of the project will be undertaken by a doctoral student, under the guidance of Prof. Smith. The doctoral student will work primarily at PSI within the Low-Level RF group and will use the Swiss FEL Injector and C-band Linac testbeds for experimental development. The academic challenges and potential contributions are in the areas of: RF system modeling and identification; repetitive robust control theory; repetitive learning algorithms; and distributed control and information architectures for high performance systems. The distributed control aspects will contribute to a new and growing research area with includes other applications such as: sensor networks; vehicle formations; and control of distributed infrastructure (for example power-grids).
