Physical Environment - Study on Aircraft Noise 2000 The objective of this study is the analysis of the effects of aircraft noise on humans. The study consists of two parts, a socio-psychological annoyance study (part 1) and a field study on noise and sleep (part 2). Part 1 aims to show and describe the dose-response-relationship between aircraft noise and annoyance. The factors causing annoyance, acoustical ones as well as non-acoustical ones, will be integrated in an appropriate model. For this reason, 1826 people in the near surrounding of Zurich airport have been surveyed in August 2001. These people are living in areas with either civil aircraft noise, or military jet noise from the near military airport Dübendorf, or both types of aircraft noise, or no aircraft noise at all. It is planned to repeat this survey in August 2003. This will allow to validate the first interrogation and to measure the change of the annoyance within the past two years, due to political and operational changes. Part 2 is focusing on the potential disturbance of sleep by nightly aircraft noise. Again, people living near Zurich airport already familiar with aircraft noise will serve as subjects. During one month, varying amounts of aircraft noise will be played back in the bedrooms of 64 subjects in a double-blind design nightly. Sleep quality will be assessed on a physiological as well as on a self-report level: The physiological parameters will be measured by seismosomnography, a new non-invasive method of measuring heartrate, breathing activity, and movemental activity of a sleeping person by means of detection of seismic waves originating from the activity of the vital organs and the extremities. This method is also being developed by the group. On the self-report level, a sleep diary and standardized questionnaires will be used. According to previous studies, sleep is disturbed more easily during the first and last hours of the night. Therefore, special emphasize will be placed on the onset and the end of sleep. The Noise Study 2000 will contribute to elucidate the relationship between nightly aircraft noise, sleep quality and personal well-being and hopefully will show possible intervention strategies to enhance the lifes of people living in the vicinity of Zurich airport.
