ENHANCE: Enhancing ecosystem connectivity through intervention U a benefit for nature and society? The ENHANCE project tests and evaluates ecosystem connectivity with state-of-the art molecular genetic experiments and population-dynamic analysis in terrestrial and riparian habitats, prior and after connectivity is enhanced. The ENHANCE project tests and evaluates ecosystem connectivity with state-of-the art molecular genetic experiments and population-dynamic analysis in terrestrial and riparian habitats, prior and after connectivity is enhanced. ENHANCE uses the expertise of WSL, ETHZ, EAWAG and EPFL teams to quantify species-specific population viability in aquatic and terrestrial habitats prior and after structural connectivity is enhanced with experimental interventions. The findings are used to link structural connectivity measures with species-specific responses and to calibrate a set of models to up-scale empirical findings to various biotic and spatial scales. Since enhancing ecosystem connectivity is a nature conservation and management issue of highest priority, we will provide societal and economic assessments of recently perfomed interventions that aim at increasing structural connectivity. Special emphasis is given to evaluate peopleSs attitudes and perception towards ecosystem enhancement. Innovation: Molecular genetic methods combined with landscape-scale ecological and modeling approaches offer a unique and new setting to test questions of species dispersal, migration, (re)colonisation and gene flow in relation to land-use and intervention. Societal relevance: Successful development and implementation of land management options require knowledge of (a) peopleSs attitudes towards ecosystem enhancement, (b) economic and societal costs and benefits of ecosystem enhancement and (c) effective (participatory) planning measures and corresponding institutional settings. Added value: Link of structural and functional connectivity; test of connectivity in different habitats; connect ecological knowledge with planning skills; valuate economic benefits/losses of the connectivity paradigm; merge scientific findings with current conservation and restoration activities of local, cantonal, and federal agencies; interdisciplinarity (natural science, socio-economic science).
