Barcelona Re.Set - Tricentenari BCN (1714-2014): Public pavilion for the celebration of European identity In collaboration with ETH architecture students and ESARQ-UIC Barcelona students, Chair Brillembourg & Klumper will conduct a research and design studio resulting in a built pavilion on a historical public square in Barcelona to commemorate the history and identity of Catalonia and Europe. In honor of the 1714 Tricentenary, the city of Barcelona has commissioned architect Benedetta Tagliabue (Enric Miralles Foundation) and stage director Àlex Ollé (La Fura dels Baus) to transform a series of public spaces within the city, from June to September 2014. They propose to create a sequence of art and architecture installations inspired by reflection on concepts related to the Tricentenary, such as identity, freedom and democracy. The six public squares chosen for this project have each been assigned to an architect of international standing and to a leading school of architecture who will be collaborating together. The Brillembourg & Klumpner Chair of Architecture & Urban Design at ETH Zurich has been selected alongside architects Peter Cook, Anupama Kundoo, Grafton Architects, Odile Decq and Urbanus Architecture & Design. The site for this project is Placa del Mar, on the seafront of the neighborhood of Barceloneta. This is a key site with an emblematic location in the city, also the stage for a huge diversity of urban activity, which the project will engage with. The concept of the project stems from the idea of markets as social spaces, used for the exchange of both goods and ideas, and creating a vibrant micro-community. Within the context of the contemporary city, the market occupies the territory between the formal and informal, top-down and bottom-up. It is a constantly changing process rather than a static object. The project will provide social infrastructure that can be activated by various programs, or used as such by the public. The programs are based on the idea of exchange, whether of goods, skills, ideas or traditions, and manifest themselves through performative events organized by a number of different collaborators throughout the summer. The Brillembourg & Klumpner Chair of Architecture & Urban Design is working closely with a group of students from ETH Zurich DARCH and the School of Architecture of the International University of Catalunya (ESARQ-UIC), developing a series of intensive educational workshops to design the installation, source materials, fabricate on site, and formulate a schedule of events. The students will see the full range of the building process, from conception to execution, and gain skills and knowledge relevant to their practice. The students from the International University of Catalunya have already visited Zurich for an intensive workshop with students and experts from ETH Zurich, and the plan is to involve students architecfrom ETH Zurich in workshops taking place in Barcelona. Experts from several fields U and ture, engineering, material science, construction, sustainability, education, theater, film, etc. U c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> Zurich, Barcelona, New York, Madrid U will be sharing their expertise and skills several cities U with the team of students during the entire process. ETH Zurich students will join the Barcelona students to build the pavilion together in the summer. The installation, designed and built entirely by a student team assembled from Barcelona and Zurich, supervised by the Brillembourg & Klumpner Chair, with the additional expertise of worldwide experts, will have a significant impact and exposure on the site. This is an incredible educational opportunity for all parties involved.
