Physiological control of a rotary ventricular assist device This project aims at the development of a controller for the physiological adaptation of a rotary ventricular assist device to the blood perfusion demand of the patient. This project is concerned with the control of rotary ventricular assist devices (VADs). VADs are mechanical pumps that are implanted into patients suffering from severe heart failure. These pumps have been introduced for bridging until a donor heart is available. Due to the increasing donor heart shortage, a permanent implantation of a VAD has become a therapy option. A rotary VAD is a turbodynamic pump. Clinically used rotary VADs are operated at a constant pump speed, which is selected by the physician, trained medical personnel, or the patient. As long as the patient is lying in the intensive care unit, the blood demand does not vary strongly and this mode of operation is suitable. If the patient executes physical exercise (e.g. walking), the blood perfusion demand increases. In this case, a constant speed strategy is not able to meet the patients demand. In this project a controller is developed, which adapts the speed of a rotary VAD according to the demand of the patient. This controller must be able to detect what the demand of the patient is and, in a safe manner, react to it. The development of this controller is based on two types of models, namely numerical and hydraulic ones. Numerical models of the human blood circulation can be developed based on the literature and serve as a helpful tool for preliminary experiments. Hydraulic models can be used as testing environments for real pumps. In this project, we have developed a novel hardware-inthe-loop test bench for VADs. Based on our experience with this test bench, we have proposed a control strategy to adapt the pump speed of a VAD according to the measured left ventricular volume. Such a control strategy imitates the Frank-Starling law of the heart. Our current research mainly focuses on the development of a ventricular volume sensor that can be integrated into the inflow cannula of a VAD.
