Improving grazing systems with Nepalese yak crossbreds to foster livelihood of mountain farmers in the Taplejung district of Nepal About 12% of total land cover of Nepal is considered to be rangeland. However, rangeland productivity is constantly declining due to high grazing pressure which has created serious threats to the sustainability of animal production in the highlands of Nepal, where poverty is highest. There are currently three livestock systems (transhumant, sedentary and stall-feeding) applied. The transhumance system uses different altitudes (subtropical to temperate region, subalpine and alpine region) in different seasons, where in the temperate region competition and conflicts with stall-feeding systems and reforestation attempts occur. It is of utmost importance to foster the livelihood of the people from the mountain areas where livestock husbandry is the most common factor determining livelihood and is dependent on the rangeland resources. Yak-based genotypes (mostly crossbreds, i.e. chauries) are the most common livestock type kept by people in 22 out of 75 districts of Nepal, whilst its productivity has been reported to decline due to the lack of sufficient pasture areas and/or due to the high grazing pressure in the highlands of Nepal. The present research aims at investigating the interrelation of socio-economic components and pasture productivity and its relation to animal productivity in the existing transhumant pastoral livestock system as a basis for future improvements. As a study area, the Taplejng district of Nepal, which includes the Kanchenjunga Conservation Area (KCA), was selected. In the project, at first the status of herd structure and production performance of yak crossbreds under the transhumant pastoral system will be recorded. For that, a detailed socioeconomic survey will be carried out. Subsequently, in a 2-year experiment, pasture productivity, carrying capacity and productive performance of the yak crossbreds will be determined, simulating different stocking densities at two resp. three sites (two altitudinal levels) in areas actually used in the transhumance system. The focus is put on grassland preservation and milk production. Apart from the thesis and scientific publications, the final product will be a guide for mountain farmers in Nepalese language describing and demonstrating best practices for sustainable pasture use in the Nepalese mountains.
