N and P cycling within soil aggregate fractions in maize-pigeonpea intercropping systems of Malawi This project will compare crop production, soil fertility accumulation, and N and P nutrient cycling within soil aggregates between maize-pigeon pea intercrops and sole cropped maize in order to elucidate the mechanisms involved with nutrient transfer between pigeon pea and maize. Description (including references to the titles of the attached graphics) Due to overall poor soil quality, lack of inputs, and an unstable, changing climate, subsistence farmers in Malawi have suffered from steadily declining crop yields over the past several years. In Malawi, maize is the primary food source and livelihood of the population, so our focus is on increasing maize production through low cost and easy to replicate methods. One method that farmers have employed for decades is the intercropping of maize with legumes. Not only can legumes fix their own N, thus providing a fertilizer source after decomposition, the added biomass from legume residues also provides a good source of soil organic matter, which these soils desperately lack. Another nutrient that is plentiful in the soil, yet largely unavailable to crops in these highly weathered soils is P. Preliminary studies have indicated that pigeon pea, a protein-rich legume commonly grown in Malawi, has the ability to access soil P pools that are typically unavailable to other crops, such as maize. If this is indeed the case, this holds great potential, since the worldSs P supply is both finite and dwindling at a very rapid rate. The main questions to be addressed are where in the soil profile this P is being accessed from, which P pool(s) it belongs to, and how it is transferred from pigeon pea to maize. This project will thus compare crop production, soil fertility accumulation, and N and P nutrient cycling between maize-pigeon pea intercrops and sole cropped maize in order to elucidate the mechanisms involved with nutrient transfer between pigeon pea and maize. The specific objectives are to: 1. Develop a novel P fractionation method integrating both physical and chemical fractionation in order to identify P pools sensitive to agricultural management. 2. Measure the quantity and specific activity of P taken up by maize and pigeon pea under different root barrier techniques in order to determine the ability of each plant to take up P mineralized by pigeon pea within the current growing season. 3. Measure available, microbial, organic, and total C, N, and P of bulk soil and aggregates of maize-pigeon pea intercrops to determine which P pools the pigeon pea is accessing. 4. Determine the effect of crop residue C, N, and P content on P dynamics within soil aggregates and soil P pools, as well as on subsequent P uptake in maize. 5. Compare grain yields and nutrient content in sole maize versus pigeon pea-maize intercropping systems. Materials and methods Objective 1: For physical soil fractionation we will use a wet sieving method and a microaggregate isolator to split the soil samples into 4 different aggregate size classes (macroaggregates, micro- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> aggregates, microaggregates within macroaggregates, and silt and clay). This will be followed by chemical fractionation using a variety of methods in order to determine available, microbial, organic, and total C, N, and P of each aggregate size. The specific chemical analysis methods have yet to be determined. Objective 2: In the greenhouse, one maize and one pigeon pea plant will be planted in a single pot under three different root barrier treatments (no barrier, mesh barrier, and solid barrier). Using 33P radioisotopes, the E values (the ratio of 33P to 31P in soil solution) of each soil will be measured as well as the L value (the ratio of 33P in plant material to 33P in soil solution) of each plant. Comparing the L/E values of maize and pigeon pea under the different root barrier treatments will allow us to determine if pigeon pea is able to access P pools unaccessible by maize as well as if this additional P can be transferred from the pigeon pea to the maize within the same growing season. Objective 3: Using soils from both the field trials (Obj. 5) and the greenhouse trials (Obj. 2), we will measure available, microbial, organic, and total C, N, and P within 4 soil aggregate fractions (macroaggregates, microaggregates, microaggregates within macroaggregates, and silt and clay) using the method developed in Objective 1. Objective 4: In the greenhouse we will label maize and pigeonpea plant tissues using 13C, 15N, and 33P isotopes. We will then apply these residues to the soil surface, mimicking field conditions, and trace the C, N, and P isotopes within the above-mentioned soil aggregate fractions through the following growing season as well as in the following maize crop. Objective 5: We will design a field trial in Malawi comparing the grain yield, biomass production, and nutrient content (N and P) of sole maize versus maize-pigeonpea intercropping systems. Equipment used Physical Fractionation: -sieves -microaggregate isolator -oven Chemical Fractionation: -spectrophotometer -DOC analyzer -phosphate analyzer -additional protocols TBD C, N, and P Cycling: -13C, 15N, and 33P isotopes -gas chromatograph -greenhouse -additional protocols TBD General soil properties: -pH meter -oven -additional protocols TBD Preliminary results (with references to graphics that are uploaded in separate file) N/A (Do not have data yet). Discussion N/A (Do not have data yet). Relevant literature Selected journal articles related to this project: Ae, N., et al. (1990). Phosphorus Uptake by Pigeon Pea and Its Role in Cropping Systems of the c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> Indian Subcontinent. Science 248(4954): 477-480. Bunemann, E. K., et al. (2004). Maize productivity and nutrient dynamics in maize-fallow rotations in western Kenya. Plant and Soil 264(1-2): 195-208. Fardeau, J. C. (1996). Dynamics of phosphate in soils. An isotopic outlook. Fertilizer Research 45(2): 91-100. Frossard, E., et al. (1994). Soil Isotopically Exchangeable Phosphorus - a Comparison between E and L-Values. Soil Science Society of America Journal 58(3): 846-851. Frossard, E., et al. (1993). Can an Isotopic Method Allow for the Determination of the PhosphateFixing Capacity of Soils. Communications in Soil Science and Plant Analysis 24(5-6): 367-377. Li, L., et al. (2007). Diversity enhances agricultural productivity via rhizosphere phosphorus facilitation on phosphorus-deficient soils. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 104(27): 11192-11196. Pypers, P., et al. (2006). Phosphorus intensity determines short-term P uptake by pigeon pea (Cajanus cajan L.) grown in soils with differing P buffering capacity. Plant and Soil 284(1-2): 217-227. Pypers, P., et al. (2006). Plant-available P for maize and cowpea in P-deficient soils from the Nigerian Northern Guinea Savanna - Comparison of E- and L-values. Plant and Soil 283(1-2): 251-264. Snapp, S., et al. (1998). Note on phosphorus and cultivar enhancement of biological nitrogen fixation and productivity of maize/bean intercrops in Malawi. Field Crops Research 58(3): 205-212.
