First-principles simulation of magnetocaloric and electrocaloric effects in nanostructured films In this project we use first principles-based simulations to explore the potential of electro- and combined electro-magneto-caloric effects as environmentally-friendly alternative for future applications in refrigeration and cooling techologies. In this project we will employ computational first-principles techniques to make quantitative predictions about the magnitude of magneto- and electrocaloric effects in different materials with the goal of identifying new advanced materials for future device applications. We will identify which factors promote large caloric effects and in particular investigate the possibility of achieving large entropy changes via combined magneto-electrocaloric (or multi-caloric ) effects, both in bulk multiferroics/magnetoelectrics and in magnetoelectric multi-component nanostructured systems. Both electro- and magneto-caloric effects are based on the same physical mechanism. An external field can be used to align the electric or magnetic dipoles in a particular material. This leads to a change in entropy and/or temperature. By repeatedly applying and removing the external field while the system is thermally isolated and then thermalizing the system using a hot and a cold heat bath, a refrigeration cycle can be designed [1]. This can lead to energy-efficient and environmentally-friendly refrigeration devices, provided that certain performance targets can be achieved. Our project explores the basic materials science governing the electro-caloric effect. Our goal is to understand which factors determine the magnitude of the electro-caloric response in different materials and find ways to optimize both magnitude and working temperatures towards practical device applications. In particular, we are assessing the possibility of enhanced caloric response through cross-coupling between electric and magnetic degrees of freedom in so-called multiferroic materials [2]. J. F. Scott, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res. 41, 229 (2011). N. A. Spaldin, S.-W. Cheong, and R. Ramesh, Physics Today 63, 38 (2010).
