Robust geostatistical methods for spatial analyses and areal mapping of data in soil protection applications In this project we develop software for robust geostatistical analyses of soil and other spatial environmental data. The software will be implemented in R, and its development will be complemented by geostatistical case studies that should document and illustrate its use for potential users. Most of geostatistical software, available either commercially in GIS and in statistical software packages or as open source software (e.g. in R, cf. www.r-project.org) rely on non-robust algorithms. This is unfortunate, because outlying observations are rather the rule than the exception in environmental data sets. Outlying observations may results from errors (e.g. in data transcription) or from local perturbations in the processes that are responsible for a given pattern of spatial variation. As an example, the spatial distribution of some trace metal in the soils of a region may be distorted by emissions of local anthropogenic sources. Outliers affect the modelling of the largescale spatial variation (trend), the estimation of the spatial dependence of the residual variation and the predictions by kriging. Identifying outliers manually is cumbersome and requires expertise. A better approach is to use robust algorithms that prevent automatically that outlying observation have undue influence. However, much of the robust statistical methods were developed for independent data. The only notable exception is the robust estimation of the variogram which has found considerable attention in recent geostatistical studies. In this project we develop robust methods for a) modelling the large-scale spatial variation of spatially referenced data by linear regression models with spatially correlated errors and b) for robust kriging. The developed algorithms will be implemented in R and bundled as an add-on package. Apart from the documentation that is standard to R software, its use will be illustrated by case studies. To this aim, we shall analyse data available from the National Soil Database (NABODAT), that is currently set-up under the auspices of the Swiss National Soil Monitoring Network (NABO) and the Federal Office for the Environment. Using the developed software, the case studies will present some step-by-step robust geostatistical analyses of soil data, which should demonstrate to potential users of our software the benefit of robust geostatistical analyses of soil data.
