Zenith Camera and Determination of Deflections of the Vertical The new Digital Astro-geodetic Deflection measuring system (DIADEM) of the Geodesy and Geodynamics Lab (GGL) is an on-line measuring system based on the CCD technique. Astronomical latitude and longitude can be determined with high accuracy in a very short time. The system operates fully automated. Application of the new Digital Astronomical DEflection Measuring system (DIADEM)of the Geodesy and Geodynamics Lab at the Institute of Geodesy and Photogrammetry of ETH is used to determine the direction of the physical plumb line and deflections of the vertical with high accuracy. The main objectives of this project is the determination of the fine structure of the geoid and the interpretation of the observed deflections of the vertical. The results contribute to improve our knowledge of the internal structure of the earth's crust. The camera system has been utilized in several international field campaigns in Switzerland, Italy, France, Spain, Portugal, Greece, Canada and Germany in collaboration with several Institutes and Universities. In 2007 further hardware improvements have been implemented. Furthermore a dedicated measurement campaign was carried out in order to check the region of Sustenpass, where some discrepancies existed in terms of height differences beween the classical height system and GPSlevelled heights. These investigations revealed an inconsistency in GPS heighting. Based on these new results the highly accurate height traverse from the Bernese Oberland to Central Switzerland (Canton of Uri) is now confirmed. In July 2008 the system was utilized in the frame of the Geodetic Project Curse 2008 for ETH students in the Area of the Northern Sporades (Greece). About 15 stations have been observed at the Islands of Alonnisos and Athos. These observations provided a new data set of deflections of the vetical aiming at an improved geoid determination in this area. In addition to the deflection measurements, sea surface topography profiles and terrestrial measurements have been measured too. During second half of 2010 the system was used to perform new measurements around the particle accelerator Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at the CERN facility near Geneva. In the framework of a PhD study the feasability of an ultra high precision local Geoid is under investigation. The main task is to provide changes in the geoid undulation with an accuracy of 0.01 mm at 200 m distance, corresponding to an angle of 10 mas! For this purpose the deflection of the vertical was measured with DIADEM along a profile of 850 m length every 10 meter. In August / September 2011 an extensive measurement campaign wa scarried out in Texas. In a close collaboration with the US-American National Geodetic Survey (NGS), some 238 stations have been observed along a test geoid slope from Austin, Texas to Corpus Christi, Texas at the coast of the Mexican Gulf. The scope of these measurements is to provide a highly precise validation tool for different geoid observation and calculation methods. During 6 weeks of observations, a mean amount of 9.5 stations per night was achieved with an accuracy of 0.1 arcsec or better. A new field of activity has been established in collaboration with the Technical University of Graz (Austria). The aim is to determine deflections of the vertical in the context of several railway-tunnel projects in Austria: undercrossing the Koralpe mountain (Koralmtunnel between Klagenfurt and Graz), and Semmering (connecting Graz and Vienna). c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2>
