Analysis of the Geometric Accuracy of Satellite-Based Products of GCOS Switzerland This project aims at analyzing the geometric accuracies of three common- ly used meteorological satellite sensors: SEVIRI, MODIS, and AVHRR. It is carried out under the GCOS (Global Climate Observing System) program in an agreement with the Swiss GCOS Office at MeteoSwiss. The Global Climate Observing System (GCOS) is a long-term program aiming at providing systematic observations required for monitoring and improving the understanding of the climate system, detecting climate changes, and assessing their impacts. GCOS is co-sponsored by four international organizations: WMO, IOC-UNESCO, UNEP, and ICSU. The Swiss GCOS Office at MeteoSwiss coordinates GCOS activities in Switzerland. Earth observation satellites are increasingly being used for climate-related measurements and for the monitoring of Essential Climate Variables, in particular due to their ability to observe the EarthSs surface globally and systematically, including areas that are otherwise difficult to access. A prerequisite for the generation of fundamental climate data records (FCDR) from satellite observations is accurate georeferencing of satellite imagery, in order to avoid errors due to misregistration. In this context, GCOS has defined target requirements for geometric accuracy. This project is carried out by the Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing Group at the ETH Zurich in the framework of an agreement with the Swiss GCOS Office at MeteoSwiss. It aims at analyzing the geolocation accuracy of three commonly used satellite sensors: SEVIRI (on board the European meteorological satellite Meteosat-9), MODIS (on board the NASA satellite Terra), and AVHRR (on board the NOAA and Metop satellite series). In more details, the project includes the following activities: - Investigation of the relative geometric accuracy within one image, between different channels, and for multi-temporal imagery - Investigation of the absolute geometric accuracy using reference data - Investigation of the temporal stability of the absolute as well as the relative geometric accuracy (e.g. from different orbital overpasses, in case of satellite maneuvers, etc.) - First analysis of the impact of geometric errors on the derivation of climate parameters Photogrammetric and image processing techniques as well as statistical analysis methods are employed for achieving the project goals.
