Supramolecular Nanosystems 1. Dynamic receptors undergoing conformational switching (T, pH, Zn(II)) betw. vase form (guest complexation in deep cavity) and kite form (large flat surface). 2. Dendritic iron porphyrins as reversible O2-binders. 3. Self-assembling amphiphilic dendrimers as transfection agents for gene delivery. A wide range of projects targets the development of new supramolecular systems with nanoscale dimensions. 1. In collaboration with the Nanoscale Science Center (NCCR) in Basel, we prepare and study dynamic receptors that function as molecular grippers. These compounds undergo conformational switching between a vase form, capable of complexation of guests in a deep cavity, and a kite form, with a large flat surface. We have shown that this conformational switching can be done both by temperature and pH change and imaged the receptors anchored to gold surfaces at molecular resolution using STM. Furthermore, we recently demonstrated that Langmuir films of the grippers can be switched from the vase to the kite conformation driven by stoichiometric zinc(II) ion complexation. These systems are now investigated to induce very large molecular motions between two bistable states. Another objective includes investigation of the vase-kite switching mechanism at the level of single molecules using confocal fluorescence microscopy (in collaboration with Prof. B. Hecht, Univ. Basel). For this purpose, dyes are attached to the walls of the molecular grippers as shown below. Ultimately, we wish to integrate the grippers into suitable devices such as scanning probe microscopy tips: they should be able to capture (by complexation) a single molecule in the vase form and hold it during translation, while releasing it upon switching to the non-bonding kite conformation. We also prepared a donor-acceptor BODIPY dye-labeled cavitand by a highly convergent, modular route from readily accessible building blocks. Computer modeling, based on X-ray crystal structures of bridged resorcin[4]arene cavitands in both vase and kite conformations suggests a ? 1000% difference in the distance between the dye pair in the contracted (ca. 7 Å) and expanded (ca. 7 nm, distance between the two B-atoms) states. This unprecedentedly large expansion/contraction movement was clearly proven by both 1H NMR and fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) measurements. Reversible vase-kite switching can be induced by changes in temperature or pH. Upon addition of TFA, the fluorescence of the acceptor dye (lambda<max> = 630 nm) vanishes almost completely, whereas the emission of the donor dye (lambda<max> = 542 nm) doubles in c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> intensity. In the expanded kite state, with a spatial separation of donor and acceptor of ca. 7 nm, the FRET efficiency is dramatically reduced. 2. In our program on functional dendrimers, we position iron heme co-factors as initiator cores into the center of spherical dendrimers. The dendritic iron porphyrins are outstanding, reversible O2-binders, displaying much higher activity than human hemoglobin, besides a very small CObinding activity. We are actively investigating the origin of this gas binding selectivity. In a major effort in collaboration with Prof. H. P. Merkle from the Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, D-CHAB, ETHZ, we prepare and test small self-assembling amphiphilic dendrimers as transfection agents for gene delivery. These compounds display excellent DNA binding and transport activities with low toxicity, matching the best vectors reported in the literature. In the frame of the Nanoscale Science Center Basel (NCCR Basel), the packing of plasmids by the self-assembling dendrimers has been demonstrated using STM-imaging. Comprehensive structure-activity relationships are pursued in future work with the objective to develop optimal vectors for gene therapy.
