A 4D Model of Neogene Exhumation in the Central Helvetic Alps The overall aim is to develop a 4D model of the progressive transition from folding, thrusting and crustal thickening to extension, faulting and exhumation in the Helvetic Alps within the footwall of the Simplon Fault Zone. The Helvetic Alps exposed north of the Rhone valley have been the subject of many studies and are now taken as a classic example of a fold-and-thrust belt developed as the result of shortening perpendicular to the Alpine chain. However, there is increasing evidence that over the last ca. 30 million years the Alps have also undergone significant extension parallel to the chain (i.e. SWNE), during continued convergence perpendicular the chain (i.e. SE-NW). Although the absolute timing, kinematics and regional extent is not yet determined, this extension parallel to the chain and the associated exhumation of rocks from depth appears to have been most active during two periods, concentrated around ca. 32 million years and ca. 19-17 million years. However, related movements have continued until the present time, with a zone of strongly enhanced seismicity broadly localized along the Rhone Valley. The Simplon Fault Zone is the major young tectonic structure controlling exhumation in the Central Alps. This project is the continuation of a study that until now has focused on the Simplon Fault Zone in the region where it is best defined, from the Val dSOssola over Simplon Pass and into the Rhone Valley. The continuation project will extend these field and laboratory studies to the west along and to the north of the Rhone Valley. The geometry and kinematics of the study region is fully 3-D, involving interacting folding and thrusting related to convergence and shearing, together with coeval and subsequent faulting and vein formation related to extension and exhumation. Radiometric dating of mineral growth can provide the important 4th dimension of absolute time. The overall aim is to develop a 4D model of the progressive transition from folding, thrusting and crustal thickening to extension, faulting and exhumation in the Helvetic Alps within the footwall of the Simplon Fault Zone.
