A cross-cultural comparison of peoples` environmental attitude ecological behavior relation Ecological behavior appears to be susceptible to a wide range of situational influences beyond people's volitional control. However, context affects a person's performance by subjective, motivational influences, and objective constraints as well as facilitators. What we need to find out is the particular contribution of the two distinguishable contextual influences that can affect a person's performance. To yield conclusive information about the universality of volition-based environmental attitude models and to reveal the most powerful constraints to certain performances, we need an ecological behavior measure that considers existent situational influences. Based on eight survey measures­i.e. attitude, subjective and moral norms, perceived control, self-interest, anticipated feelings, ecological behavior intention, and ecological behavior­, the aim of this research is to find out about the universality of attitudinal influences on people's ecological behavior. About 1200 persons from two study sites within Germany will be compared with a sample of approximately 850 from the Swiss location who were interviewed/tested in a former study. The study contributes to three major issues: (a) It will find out about the level of universality of the environmental attitude ecological behavior relation across different cultures and cultural subgroups, respectively. (b) It will uncover the impact of culturally relative subjective contextual influences on people's ecological behavior (i.e., attitudinal influences), and (c) the ecological behavior measure­based on item response theory­ can be used to search also for objective contextual influences cross-culturally that might enhance people's ecological performance generally (i.e., effective behavior modification measures). At best, this research will change the political adoption policy for behavior modification measures into an active and objective search and evaluation process in which societies and cultural subgroups within societies will be screened for subjective and objective behavior modification measures that enhance people's ecological performance significantly.
