Looking at Pictures. Ways of Understanding Images and Perception in Psychology and Art History after 1945 The project explores the various models of visual perception and iconic concepts that were delivered in the exchange between art history and psychology in the second half of the 20th century. Focussing the history of psychology will establish an alternative pre-history of the so-called iconic turn. Over the last twenty years major impulses for novel research questions in the humanities have been With the main protagonists coming from the fields of art indebted to the so-called Siconic ¸ turnT. history, visual studies and science studies, this turn came with a range of theoretical considerations for better understanding images and ways of visual perception. Remarkably, since the iconic turn, ° the psychology of perception has remained a blind spot for the proliferation of image theoriesUin terms of the specific historical references and traditions. With our project we intend to bring the history of psychology back into the focus of this field of research. By reconstructing the continuous formative influence of psychological concepts on the perception of art and images as well as on the discipline of art history during the 20th century, we want to develop an alternative pre-history of the iconic turn. It is all the more significant to comprehend the historical entanglements of perception, psychology and art history today, as some recent trends ´ experimental art do indicate a Sreturn of (neuro-)psychologyS within art history. These projects U appeal through their promise of turning disciplines history, so-called neuro-aesthetics and others U But their further consequences, i. like art history into an exact and applied SGeisteswissenschaft ¸ T. e. their possibilities and limitations, for the discipline of art history, and more generally, the humanities are frequently underestimated. The projectSs historiographical objectives therefore are threefold: 1) to systematically explore the historical exchange between notions of image perception, art history and psychology in the second after World War II that triggered this half of the 20th century, 2) to reconstruct a Svisual ¸ turnT intersection, and 3) to reconstruct the boundary work art history was committed to as an acade Uin particular, the challenges that followed from encounters of psychology and mic disciplineU To reach these art history through practical contexts like visual education, or Sart ¸ psychologyT. goals, methodologically, our study will go beyond the interpretation of historical texts and will specifically focus on images and pictures as boundary objects of investigation by actors from both art history and psychology, as well as the specific practices employed to develop theories of visual perception. By way of scrutinizing historical key issues, on a more systematical level the projectSs overall goals are to deliver new impulses for image theory, as well as to develop a set of critical instruments for assessing todaySs challenge of Sapplied ¸ humanitiesT.
