Modelling and simulation of dynamic systems - a collection of applied examples. Since most real processes are dynamic by nature, their modelling and simulation are well established in science and engineering. Experience has shown that students have great difficulty with the mathematical description of particular processes and, consequently, also with the understanding of dynamic systems. Therefore the project partners resident at UASs, the Universities and the ETH will co-operate in the development of a teaching method that allows an easy and pragmatic approach for students and newcomers to the field of modelling and simulation of dynamic systems. To stress the relevance of the new teaching materials to applied problems, a collection of examples based on real data will be implemented into the standard courses. These methods, are particularly suited to the realisation of teaching materials on the Internet. Simulation examples will be developed to accompany more conventional on-line materials as a part of an Internet course. The users can carry out experiments via the simulations and have access to the different stages of modelling. In such a way, understanding of observed phenomena and particular processes will be enhanced, underlying general (modelling) concepts and computing methods will be more apparent, practical experiments can be planned and optimised, in contrast to standard teaching materials, dynamic simulations can be adapted with data from real experiments, and existing teaching materials will be updated by incorporating new information. In addition to dynamic simulations, the necessary basic knowledge of mathematics, chemistry and biology will be available via the Internet. The models will be initially created by the application of usual computer algebra systems and simulation software. The simulations will then be realised as Java-Applets and, in this way, they become directly available via the Internet for interactive use without having to load additional software. The examples will be used in the teaching of specialised subjects as well as in basic training. First and foremost, processes in the field of biotechnology will be modelled. Both the modular structure of the course and its multi-language support provide access to a wide international spectrum of target students on different types of courses and at different levels. The materials will be developed during a period of two years. In the third year a field test and search for sponsors will be carried out. We also intend to accompany the Web-materials with a series of monographs on particular specialised topics.
