ALPS: Open Source Software for Quantum Lattice Models The ALPS project (Algorithms and Libraries in Physics Simulations) is an open source effort aiming at simplifying the development of simulation codes for quantum many body systems. It provides libraries for the simulation of classical and quantum models and stateof-the-art application programs. Unlike in other physics communities there have been no community codes available to study strongly correlated quantum mechanical systems with researchers writing individual codes, adjusting them for specific needs of new projects and thereby investing weeks to months in software development. The ALPS project (Algorithms and Libraries for Physics Simulations) is an open source effort aiming at simplifying the development of simulation codes for strongly correlated quantum mechanical systems. A set of libraries of differing technical level have been implemented to support c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> researchers to develop model independent, generic software, including basic libraries for lattice structures, quantum models, error analysis, parallelization of simulations and XML tools. On top, generic application programs are offered to non-experts, such as Monte Carlo for classical magnets, Quantum Monte Carlo for quantum magnets and bosons (stochastic series expansion (SSE), continuous time worm algorithm) as well as exact and full diagonalization. Future applications will include Density Matrix Renormalization Group (DMRG) and Linked Cluster Series Expansions. The ALPS project constitutes an international collaboration with researchers contributing from France, Germany, Japan and Switzerland. The developed software is free for non-commercial scientific use and published under a cite me -license based on the GNU public license. We envision the ALPS project to become a valuable library for experienced researchers who intend to embark on numerical simulations as well as graduate students who want to broaden their knowledge on numerical methods and contribute new algorithmic developments.
