THELMA - Technology-centered Electric Mobility Assessment The THELMA project is a large scale, ambitious project aimed at an integrated assessment of a significant penetration of electric vehicles into the Swiss transport sector, and the impacts on both the Swiss electric grid and Switzerland as a whole. The project starts with a multi-criteria assessment of a broad range of future vehicle designs, using both drivetrain simulation and life cycle analysis. This is extended to the national level using fleet penetration scenarios and transportation demand forecasting to determine the incremental loads on the Swiss grid. Grid simulation then finds costs on the equipment, distribution and transmission levels. Finally, municipal case studies explore the roles of local distributed generation and consumer transport decisionmaking. The goal is to comprehensively assess the tradeoffs and sustainability implications of the increased use of light electric vehicles, as compared to other drivetrains and fuels. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> The project is being undertaken by a partnership of 6 different research groups from EMPA, ETH Zurich and PSI. WORK PACKAGE 2: ETHZ-LAV is the leader of Work package 2, in cooperation with PSI-LEA. Both groups combine their respective competences: LAV has extensive experience in vehicle simulation, energy management strategies and the dynamics of internal combustion engines; PSI-LEA is specialized on heuristic vehicle modeling, hybrid electric and fuel cell vehicles. The main objective is the calculation of energy consumption data of various vehicles, using different powertrain technologies under a wide range of operation conditions. In particular the behavior of conventional, hybrid electric (including plug-in hybrids and range extenders), fuel cell and battery electric vehicles belonging to separate vehicle classes like S.U.V.Ss, sedans, etc. are simulated for assorted driving cycles, representative of real-world driving conditions (i.e. different road-types (motorway, rural, inner-city) and traffic conditions). This permits presenting the technical trade-offs of powertrain electrification in an unbiased manner to allow stakeholders to evaluate the merits of new vehicle propulsion technologies with respect to: Performance (acceleration, drivability, handling) Environmental factors (greenhouse gas emissions, criteria tailpipe emissions) Utility (Range, life-time durability) Cost (operation, maintenance) Safety (occupant, pedestrian) Besides the direct analysis of the technology criteria, the technology descriptions will also serve as inputs to other work packages.
