Synthetic Biology for multienzyme reactions One-pot enzymatic reaction cascades can open a way for the efficient synthesis of complex molecules in fine chemistry. We investigate rational, model-based catalyst design strategies and the corresponding experimental methodology to construct viable process models with these catalysts. Typically, organic syntheses for complex pharmaceutical intermediates are carried out step by step in different vessels at different times. Biotransformations are usually involved in just one or very few separate steps. The development of systems of biotransformations in which whole reaction cascades would be carried out by a set of different enzymes may lead to simplified, accelerated and improved performance of multi-step organic syntheses. Considering the vast number of enzymes present in a single cell, all of which are tuned to a specific set of environmental parameters, it seems that a cellular system is predestined to be rebuilt into a system of biotransformations. In this rebuilding process, one has to deal with the high complexity of the entire cellular reaction network. Therefore, the development of an in silico model of the cellSs metabolism and the subsequent analysis including the in silico construction of the system of biotransformation highly desirable. The output of the in silico studies provides the information which genes should be introduced, knocked out or overexpressed in vivo for the construction of the system of biotransformations. Rather than with living cells (as in metabolic engineering), a system of biotransformations is based for example U on perforated E. coli cells. The perforation destroys the cellSs membrane potentiU al and thus the cellSs viability. As one consequence, the characteristics of the resulting Scell-free ¸ T system of biotransformations can be derived from a combination of single-step enzyme kinetic expressions and might be amenable for established multistep-reaction modeling methods. Our model compound is dihydroxyaceton phosphate (DHAP), to which the bacterial membrane is impermeable. DHAP is of interest as it is an essential substrate for the aldolase-catalyzed asymmetric carbon-carbon bond formation (Fig. 1). As an intermediate of the rather well-understood glycolysis, DHAP is excellently suited for the investigation of a process based on the concept of a system of biotransformations.
