South Africa's Continental Strategy Beyond the Region, 1961-1992 Looking at Africa from the southernmost country, the continent can be divided into three sections: Southern Africa, North Africa and the intermediate part of Africa, which for the purpose of this study, is called middle Africa . These three areas were in Pretoria's short, distant and medium sphere of influence. The existing literature on South Africa's foreign policy prior to the end of apartheid creates the impression that Pretoria only had a policy towards the Southern African region. This study reveals that it also pursued a vigorous continental strategy and it attempts to fill the vacuum of this much neglected aspect of South Africa's foreign policy during the apartheid period. The geographic scope of this study is limited to middle Africa , comprising 38 states. Pretoria's interest in these countries and the resulting strategies and policies are the focus of this study. South Africa's approach here significantly differed from its policy towards its neighbourhood and towards North Africa. North Africa (Morocco, the Western Sahara, Algeria, Tunisia, Libya and Egypt) is excluded here for three reasons. First, given the nature of apartheid, contacts with non-black African states posed less of a political problem than those with black Africa. Second, these states were closer to the European and Middle Eastern sphere. Third, and reflecting the aforesaid, the Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA) separately dealt with those countries from an organisational point of view (see its organigrams in the Appendix). Not considered either is the Southern African Region, comprising Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Mozambique, Namibia/S.W.A., Swaziland, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. Due to their geographical proximity they were South Africa's backyard and many authors described its role as that of a regional superpower or regional great power . The South African government relied on economic factors such as trade, control of transport routes and migrant labour to ensure that these states became dependent. Militarily, its weapons and arms arsenal placed it in a position to attack any of these countries at any time. Pretoria used these factors, for example, to prevent these countries from hosting African National Congress (ANC) military bases. The dissertatian's historical starting point is 1961, when South Africa attained the status of an independent Republic. In a parallel move, a wave of independence swept across the continent. In 1963, these newly independent African states formed the Organisation of African Unity (OAU). One of the principal aims was to liberate the black continent from white colonial rule. Together with the United Nations (UN) these forums were instrumentalised for launching verbal attacks and diplomatic manoeuvres against South Africa. Here a unique form of legally entrenched white minority rule held sway and the OAU equalled the struggle for decolonisation with the struggle against apartheid. Both organisations also supported the ANC's international campaign to isolate apartheid South Africa to ensure the demise of the racist regime. This study ends in August 1992. On 17 June of that year, 46 people died in a massacre in the black township of Boipatong (near Johannesburg). The ANC charged the South African government to be the main culprit. Upon its request the OAU called upon the UN Security Council to consider the situation in South Africa. Meetings were held in July and August which led to the deployment of a UN and other observer missions. This finally brought to an end Pretoria's hopes of securing African acceptance for white minority rule. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> The principal aim of this study is to show that the South African government aimed at dividing and thereby destroying the African alliance against its apartheid policy. And it presents the ways and means that were used in this attempt. Pretoria considered itself as just another African state. But it was forced to realise that unless African acceptance could be found for a white African state on the black continent it would not be tolerated by the international community either. This introductionary part is followed by an analysis of the domestic sources that framed South Africa's approach to middle Africa over the years. The following section looks at the two main pillars on which Pretoria's policy to divide the African alliance rested: economic incentives and military engagement. The conclusion evaluates the success of Pretoria's continental strategy. I also look at the success of the ANC's policy to bring about the fall of the apartheid regime with the support of African states.
