Assessment of Gastric Motor Function using Magnetic Resonance Imaging The knowledge about gastric motor functions such as gastric emptying and motility is essential in understanding the gastric physiology and may provide insights into gastric malfunction. Efforts comprise the development of new MRI examination procedures for the assessment of gastric motor function. Introduction Detailed knowledge of the physiology of the human stomach is important for a comprehensive understanding of gastrointestinal symptoms such as impaired gastric emptying, diarrhoea, bloating, early satiety, nausea and pain. A variety of methods is applied to analyse these pathologies in standard clinical practice. These include gastric endoscopy, manometry and barostat, as well as gastric scintigraphy and ultrasound. In recent years, Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) has become a valuable tool in gastric research due to its versatility with regard to variable soft tissue contrast, 3D capability, high spatial and temporal resolution (Figure 1) and thus represents a particularly suitable method of imaging organ function. MRI can supplement and extend the standard of knowledge in gastrointestinal research and clinical practice. Aims and methods The aim of this project is to apply and evaluate MRI methods for a better understanding and analysis of human gastrointestinal physiology and motor activity. The main focus of the work is directed to the following topics: T ¸ The influence of the gastroduodenal sphincter (pylorus) on gastric emptying and gastric and duodenal peristalsis It is generally agreed on, that the pylorus exerts the final level of control over gastric emptying. Nevertheless the underlying mechanism is poorly understood. The problem of analysing the role of pyloric opening in gastric emptying is primarily because of the difficulty of imaging the antropyloroduodenal region. First aim of this work is the development of specific MR sequences to image and quantify pyloric opening, gastric and duodenal contraction and transpyloric flow. Following the evaluation of these MR sequences, physiological studies in human volunteers will be established that enable for an improved analysis of pyloric control mechanisms. A dedicated postprocessing environment is to be developed to quantitatively determine gastric and/or meal volume, gastric contraction frequency and/or amplitude and gastric flow. T ¸ Analysis of intragastric distribution and emptying of pharmaceutical oral dosage forms Knowledge of the fate of pharmaceutical oral dosage forms and distribution of the delivered drugs in the human gastrointestinal (GI) tract is of crucial importance for the development of controlled drug delivery systems. The use of MR contrast markers as drug models and methods to label oral dosage forms were evaluated in-vitro and then validated in human volunteers. The effects of food consistency and of post-prandial position on dosage form performance and on intragastric drug model distribution were analysed in volunteer studies. Dedicated post-processing algortihms have been developed to analyse intragastric distribution and concentration of contrast markers and intragastric distribution of labelled dosage forms and meal volume (Figure 2). c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2>
