Climate Change, Hydro-conflicts and Human Security Researchers in the International and Comparative Political Economy group of Prof. Dr. Thomas Bernauer as well as scholars from the Peace Research Institute in Oslo (PRIO) are currently in the process of creating a unique data set of cooperative and conflictive events related to water. Researchers in the International and Comparative Political Economy group of Prof. Dr. Thomas Bernauer as well as scholars from the Peace Research Institute in Oslo (PRIO) are currently in the process of creating a unique data set of cooperative and conflictive events related to water. These data will cover all riparian countries of the Mediterranean as well as states in the Middle East and the Sahel between 1997 and 2009. The project is funded by the EU within a broader research agenda on Climate Change, Hydro-conflicts and Human Security (CLICO) By regressing political, economic and climatic factors on the collected data, Thomas Bernauer and his colleagues will identify the driving forces that lead to cooperation and conflict on water across the region. The gained knowledge on these factors that are generic to many countries complements the more region-specific insights on water conflict and cooperation structures, which are generated by the in-depth case studies as part of the overall CLICO framework. Also, this large-N study enables both scientists and policy makers to identify atypical cases, e.g. countries that face severe water stress but rather show a low level of conflict. Once identified, some will be investigated in greater detail. Another objective of the statistical analyof these Soutliers ¸ T sis of socio-economic and political variables is to assess how secure and resilient both economic and political systems are to climate-induced water stress. Inter alia, income level and distribution, characteristics and quality of political systems, environmental conditions and ethnic diversity are likely to be explanatory factors that will be considered in the assessment.
