Flow of Non Newtonian Fluids through Compressible Filter Cakes in Centrifugal Fields with SuperimposedStatic Pressure For many industries, solid-liquid separation is a most important field of unit operations. Especially for food suspension systems, where density differences may be very small, centrifugation techniques are often used. In suspension systems to be separated, where deformable particles (e.g. cellulose fibres, protein flocks, macromolecular aggregates) build up a compressible filter cake, the flow rate of the filtrate may be very small and consequently the separation process is inefficient. A newly developed centrifugation principle allows the superposition of a static pressure field to the centrifugal field in the apparatus. This means that in addition to the centrifugal pressure the static pressure increases the acting pressure gradient for the filtrate flow through the pores of the filter cake. For compressible filter cakes, an increase of the pressure gradient increases as well the degree of compression. Therefore the functional dependency of compressibility and flow resistance (through the pores) on the acting pressure determines the effect on the volume flow rate of the fluid. If the fluid is non Newtonian and especially shear-thinning, an increase of the pressure gradient increases as well the acting shear stresses, thereby reducing viscosity of such fluids. This has a positive effect filtrate throughput. The present work deals with the analytical determination of the compressibility behaviour for real filter cakes and the change of the pore structure (porosity, mean hydraulic pore diameter, pore size distribution). On the basis of the differential Darcy equation a new theoretical approach for the flow of non Newtonian fluids through compressible filter cakes shall allow us to pre-calculate filtrate flow under real process conditions. Process parameters to be considered are the rotational speed centrifuge geometry, the superimposed static pressure and temperature. Additionally, the type of filter medium (permeability), the solid volume fraction of the suspension, the total suspension volume, the particle size distribution of the suspension particles, and the rheological properties of the suspension fluid will be taken into account. Calculated and experimental values measured on a small process scale unit are compared. Process and apparatus design and scale-up laws will be derived.
