Comparative Sequencing of primary renal cell carcinoma (KLS) Comparative Sequencing of primary renal cell carcinoma: towards a quantitative understanding of tumor diversity and evolution (KLS) Tumors are large systems of cells that have lost their normal cooperative behavior and proliferate in an uncontrolled manner. Tumor development is an evolutionary process, in which somatic cells accumulate genetic alterations through mutation and selection and thereby outgrow normal cells of the tissue. Advantageous mutations repeatedly trigger clonal expansions, which facilitate the generation of additional, even more malignant cells. The tumor cell population is a diverse ensemble of individuals and their genetic diversity is the basis for evolutionary escape from immune responses and drug therapy. Thus, a quantitative understanding of tumor evolution is essential for rational drug development and for the design of effective treatment strategies. Tumors typically consist of more than one billion cells, each containing a genome of 6 billion nucleotides. To capture the complexity of carcinogenesis, mathematical models are indispensable. Mathematical models of tumor evolution include multistage models and population genetics models. Multistage theory was developed from cancer incidence data and it postulates linear progression through multiple stages. In order to identify genetic changes as such rate-limiting events, comprehensive screens of cancer genomes are necessary. Unlike multistage theory, population dynamics models can also represent genetic diversity within tumors. However, most population genetics approaches are conceptual due to lack of appropriate data. For testing these models and for estimating their parameters, inter-tumor as well as intra-tumor genetic diversity needs to be assessed. We propose to use next-generation sequencing (NGS) to comprehensively analyze the genomic changes in renal cancer patients. Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is an aggressive cancer of the kidney with a median survival time of patients with metastatic disease of 13 months. Genetically, the disease is linked to inactivating mutations in the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumor suppressor gene, often caused by a combination of point mutation and loss of chromosome arm 3p. Subsequent tumor progression is, however, poorly understood. RCC is a promising candidate for the analysis of tumor evolution as it is known to display considerable cytogenetic and genetic heterogeneity. We first employ whole-exome sequencing of healthy control tissue, and two biopsies of the primary RCC tumor. Currently we have material of a panel of 17 thoroughly characterized RCC patients which will be included in this study. This broad approach will generate a map of genomic alterations that characterize the primary tumor and of the genetic intra-tumor diversity. By using a paired-end shotgun sequencing approach, we can detect single nucleotide variants (SNVs) as well as structural rearrangements, including chromosomal gains and losses, and copy number-neutral translocations. In addition to intra-patient comparisons, genomic alterations are also analyzed by searching databases of known somatic or cancer-associated mutations, by their predicted effect on protein function or gene regulation, and by their functional role in cellular pathways. Based on these analyses, genetic changes are identified that are likely to play a causal role in tumor development and metastasis formation. The candidate mutations will be re-analyzed in all 51 samples (three per patient) using directed NGS at very high coverage. The ultra-deep sequencing step is then extended to an additional 300 samples, three from each of 100 independent patients (one healthy control and two tumor biopsies). This approach can reveal the presence of candidate mutations even at very low frequencies within each tumor and it allows for estimating the genetic diversity across a total of 117 tumors. We will investigate the impact of tumor diversity on the progression dynamics and explore the c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> prediction of evolutionary pathways from such genetic snapshot data. Whether or not a mutation is present on a subclone in the primary tumor provides insight into the evolutionary dynamics of cancer. Specifically, the data will allow for estimating the cooccurrence of mutations within the tumor cell population and point to interactions among subclones. This study will provide direct evidence for tumor evolution and a comprehensive statistical analysis of genomic diversity in renal cell carcinoma. The combined whole-exome and ultra-deep re-sequencing data offers a unique basis for inferring coevolutionary patterns and for quantitative modeling of the evolution of cancer. Predictive models will help understanding tumor progression dynamics, improve cancer diagnostics, and eventually support personalized cancer treatment.
