Toward potentiometric single-molecule detection: Optimizing ion sensors for small sample quantities Development of ion-selective electrodes capable of measuring nanomolar to picomolar ion activities in samples of very small volumes. By labeling biomolecules with metal nanoparticle tags and dissolving the metals in such small sample volumes, the novel sensors may lead to single molecule detection. During recent years, we have developed various strategies to dramatically improve the performance of potentiometric ion sensors and have introduced ion-selective electrodes (ISEs) for a series of ions including Pb2+, Cd2+, and Ag+ with detection limits in the nanomolar to picomolar range. With these improvements, potentiometry belongs to the most sensitive techniques of ion analysis. The topic of this grant application is the development of ISEs capable of measuring such low ion activities in samples of very small volumes. By using the recently established labeling of biomolecules and DNA with nanoparticle-based metal (Ag) and semiconductor (CdS, PbS) tags and dissolving the metals in such small sample volumes, ISEs may, eventually, lead to potentiometric single molecule detection. One important outcome would be the DNA detection without need of amplification. By labeling enzymes with the nanoparticles, highly sensitive potentiometric immunoassays would be available. Two approaches to reducing the sample volumes will be investigated. The first one makes use of novel possibilities of miniaturizing the sensors by introducing capillaries, commonly used for reversed-phase chromatography, with conventional and with monolithic stationary phases. This approach is expected to reduce the sample volume to about 1 nanoliter. An even stronger reduction down to the picoliter to femtoliter range will be endeavored by making use of the spontaneous formation of a thin aqueous film between a metal electrode and a polymeric membrane. The minia U turized sample volumes will allow us to reduce the required quantity of the sample ions to 10U15 <10U20 mols.
