Covalent and Supramolecular Fullerene Chemistry Intermolec. chromophore interactions in bis(C60)-oligoporphyrin nanoarrays; laterally addressable single-molecule devices: prep. of 1D and 2D fullerene patterns on preorganized mono- and diporphyrin monolayers on Ag surfaces; regio- and stereoselective tetherdirected remote functionalization In fullerene research, we wish to provide chemists and materials scientists with a diverse library of functional, fullerene-based molecular building blocks for the construction of three-dimensional functional materials. To achieve this objective, we develop simple, regioselective multiple functionalization techniques for fullerenes. By tether-directed remote functionalization, multiple adducts of C60 with different addition patterns are prepared with high regio- and stereoselectivity. Examples are a fullerene-porphyrin conjugate and a crown ether conjugate, both with the so-called trans-1 addition pattern. Using this methodology, bis-crown-ether conjugates of the higher fullerene C70 are readily prepared. The specific functionalization dramatically influences the reactivity of the carbon allotropes. Thus, the fullerene-porphyrin conjugate undergoes photo-induced electron transfer under generation of a low-energy charge-transfer excited state emitting in the near infrared. Complexation of potassium ions by fullerene-crown ether conjugates makes it much easier to reduce the fullerene electrochemically, since the resulting fullerene mono-anions are stabilized electrostatically by the cations bound on the surface of the carbon spheres. Recently we introduced derivatives of the Tröger base as chiral tethers. Thus bis-adducts of C60 with trans-1, trans-2, and trans-4 addition pattern were regio- and diastereoselelectively synthesized in high yield using bis-malonates tethered by the structural core of TrögerSs base. Moreover, both enantiomers of the trans-2 adduct, which has an inherently chiral addition pattern, were prepared from non-racemic tethers. This represents the first example for an application of Tröger's base as chiral auxiliary in asymmetric synthesis. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> With their unique electronic properties and their three-dimensional shapes, fullerenes are ideal components for incorporation into advanced supramolecular materials and devices. Taking advantage of versatile synthetic protocols we prepared fullerene-containing rotaxanes and catenanes, fullerene-based electrochemical ion sensors, solid-contact ion-selective electrodes, monolayers for photocurrent generation, fullerene-coated electrodes (5), fullerene-modified semiconductor surfaces, as well as polysiloxane-supported oxidation catalysts. Porphyrin-fullerene conjugates are intensely investigated as electron donor-acceptor dyads and triads, in which porphyrin donors lose their characteristic luminescence properties as a result of light-induced energy and/or electron transfer to the fullerene acceptor. We have developed fullerene-oligoporphyrin conjugates with two singly and triply linked porphyrin units. By variabletemperature 1H NMR spectroscopy, the attractive interaction between a fullerene and a tangential porphyrin (singly linked) in perdeuterated toluene was determined as 12 kJ mol-1. Exceptional electrochemical properties were determined for the above diporphyrin conjugates. They undergo up to eighteen reversible electron transfers in cyclic voltammetry and differential pulse voltammetry experiments. The dyad with a singly linked diporphyrin shows a photophysical behavior similar to that reported in the literature for other porphyrin-fullerene donor-acceptor systems. Upon excitation, the porphyrin luminescence is quenched due to photo-induced electron transfer to the fullerenes under formation of a luminescent charge-transfer state. In sharp contrast, photoexcitation of the fullerene spheres in the triply linked dyad results in quantitative sensitization, presumably via energy transfer, of the very short-lived, low-lying diporphyrin singlet, that acts as an energy sink for the higher electronic levels, and porphyrin emission is observed. In future study, we continue to expand the oligoporphyrin arrays and enhance the density of the peripherally conjugated fullerenes to produce efficient multi-charge storage compounds. Upon evaporation of pristine C60 on pre-organized mono- and diporphyrin monolayers on silver surfaces, unprecedented one-and two-dimensional fullerene patterns were obtained in collaboration with the Nanoscale Science Center (NCCR Nano) in Basel. The STM-observed mode of self-assembly arises from a delicate balance between the fullerene-porphyrin interactions and the conformational motion within the underlaying porphyrin layer. C60 can be reversibly repositioned with the STM tip, while the ordered diporphyrin monolayer is not affected by the fullerene relocalization. This supramolecular approach holds enormous potential for the fabrication of laterally addressable single-molecule devices, which are currently under investigation. Future work in fullerene chemistry will also focus on the design and construction of efficient chiral, non-racemic receptors that are able to discriminate between enantiomers of the various classes of chiral fullerene derivatives, thereby opening new opportunities for separation techniques.
