The effect of dietary iron on the human gut microbiota and digestive pathogens: Towards new strategies to safe iron supply The general objective of the project is to build up basic knowledge on effect of iron fortification on gut microbiota in children to design efficient and safe fortification strategies, using in vivo investigation and mechanistic study using a novel in vitro colonic model using immobilized microbiota Half of the worldSs population is currently suffering from iron deficiency and strategies to improve dietary bioavailability or supplementation therefore become important. Iron fortification is probably the most practical, sustainable and cost-effective long term solution to control iron deficiency at the national level. However, fortification of foods with iron is more difficult than with other nutrients. The most bioavailable iron compounds are soluble in water or diluted acid, but often react with other food components and absorption of fortification iron is nearly always <10% of the total dose, and with poorly-soluble forms of iron, is often as low as <2-3%. Thus, 90-98% of fortification Fe typically passes into the colon and is available for digestive pathogens and the human gut microbiota, a dense and diverse microbial community harbored in the gut. The general objective of the project is to build up basic knowledge on effect of iron fortification on gut microbiota in children to design efficient and safe fortification strategies. The research strategy will involve two major steps: (1) We will first investigate in vivo gut microbiota composition in children before and after iron fortification. Prevalence of the main bacterial pathogens in children in developing countries will be also evaluated in African children during iron fortification. In vivo approach will be completed studying impact of iron depletion and repletion on gut microbiota composition and metabolic activities in conventional rats in order to characterize the impact of iron fortification on gut microbiota composition. (2) A new in vitro model using immobilized fecal microbiota will be then developed to reproduce and evaluate the impact of iron on gut microbiota. Sequence of iron depletion and repletion mimicking iron deficiency and fortification will be reproduced and investigated using the model testing different sources of iron. Impact of iron fortification will be also investigated in vitro on Salmonella infection. The relationship between iron intake, gut microbiota and pathogenic invaders will be then investigated using coupled fermentation models and nanotechnology detection to generate fundamental knowledge about iron homeostasis and bacteria in the gut. This project will lead to the development and validation of new in vitro intestinal model to study effect of iron fortification. These in vitro models should allow to design new, efficient and safe iron fortification strategies including gut microbiota modification in order to improve iron absorption or/and protect the host against pathogenic microorganisms.
