MOUNTLAND 2: Prioritization for adaption to climate and socio-economic changes. Backcasting tolerable future states to match supply and demand for ecosystem services in mountainous areas. Ecosystem services provided by mountainous regions are strongly influenced by climate and land-use changes. This project identifies potential future tolerable states of ecosystem service provisioning and the impact of management and policy decisions towards achieving those goals. This project continues the work of MOUNTLAND 1 by examining the spatially explicit supply and demand of ecosystem services, and the interactions with policy and management options. MOUNTLAND 2 uses a backcasting approach which identifies potential future tolerable states of ecosystems. The idea is to combine the system boundary conditions with management and policy options, and identify potential pathways towards achieving those future states. One of the main goals of MOUNTLAND 2 is to develop a unified ecosystem model which can represent all three case study regions. The three regions represent different sensitivities to climate and land use change, and provide different ecosystem goods and services. The three case study regions are the Jura Vaudois (pasture-woodland ecosystems), the Central Wallis (drought-sensitive inner Alpine ecosystems), and Davos (temperature sensitive high Alpine ecosystems). The model will take into account regionally specific ecological drivers and be able to simulate ecosystem and landscape dynamics in response to climate change, management and land-use changes. For this purpose, the existing forest landscape model LandClim will be further developed such that it will be able to simulate forests, pasture-woodlands and grasslands in an integrated modelling framework. Since LandClim is currently a forest model, model modifications will include adding non-woody plants, interactions between cattle and plants, and relevant pasture and meadow management options. The specific research questions for this task are: (1) What are the ecological boundary conditions in all three case study regions? (2) How can different management strategies achieve the future tolerable ecosystem service states? (3) How do the three case study regions differ? Are these dissimilarities due to differences in ecosystem drivers or economic, social and policy constraints on land use and management?
