Catalysis of Disulfide Bond Formation During Protein Folding Disulfide bond formation constitutes the rate-limiting step during folding of secretory proteins. The reason is that a disulfide bond cannot form automatically when two cysteine residues come close during the folding process because disulfide bond formation is an oxidation process which requires an external oxidant. Formation of wrong disulfide bonds may be another kinetic trap during folding, especially for proteins with multiple disulfide bonds where the number of possible disulfide conformers increases by approximately one order of magnitude per additional disulfide bond. In the living cell, the efficient formation of disulfide bonds and the rapid isomerization of wrong disulfide bonds is guaranteed by enzymes belonging to the disulfide oxidoreductase family. These enzymes share the thioredoxin fold and possess a catalytic disulfide bond with the consensus sequence Cys-Xaa-Xaa-Cys. During the last 6 years we have worked on the characterization of the bacterial members of this enzyme family, in particular DsbA from the periplasm of Escherichia coli. DsbA is a monomer of 189 residues with extraordinary biophysical properties. The enzyme is the strongest oxidant in the family, undergoes the fastest disulfide exchange reactions known so far and transfers its catalytic disulfide bonds to folding polypeptides with rate constants that are close to the diffusion limit. The reason for the extremely reactive catalytic disulfide is a very low pKa of 3.5 for the more N-terminal active-site cysteine. In collaboration with Dr. Tad Holak (Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried) we have solved the NMR structure of reduced DsbA. We have also performed extensive mutagenesis experiments on DsbA to investigate the molecular basis of its extreme reactivity. Specifically, we found that the Xaa-Xaa dipeptide within the active-site sequence strongly influences the redox potential of the enzyme. Replacement of this sequence by the Xaa-Xaa sequences of more reducing members of the thioredoxin family yields more reducing DsbA variants. Analogous results were obtained with Xaa-Xaa variants of thioredoxin, the most reducing member of the enzyme family: Introduction of Xaa-Xaa sequences of other disulfide oxidoreductases exclusively yielded more oxidizing variants. By using these variants of thioredoxin and DsbA we are presently investigating the importance of the redox potential of these enzymes for their function in vivo. Moreover, we are investigating the interactions of these enzymes with their natural substrates and work on bacterial expression systems that provide high yields of correctly folded proteins with disulfide bonds in the periplasm.
