Aggregation of therapeutic proteins during industrial production The stability behavior of therapeutic proteins is of great interest to the biopharmaceutical industry. The aggregation of monoclonal antibodies is investigated combining experimental characterization with mathematical models, providing insights into mechanisms and kinetics of protein aggregation. Protein aggregation is involved in several relevant research fields such as biology, biomedicine, pharmaceutics, food industry and nanotechnology. This project is focused on the stability behavior of therapeutic proteins, and in particular monoclonal antibodies. Aggregation is the major protein instability encountered in almost all stages of therapeutic protein processing including expression from the cells, purification, formulation, storage, shipping and administration. The presence of protein aggregates in pharmaceuticals is generally unacceptable as it usually leads to the inactivation of the drug and can even trigger an immunogenic response of the organism. Aggregation is therefore a significant hurdle in protein drug development, hindering rapid commercialization of potential drug candidates. A wide variety of products may result from protein aggregation. The aggregates can be reversible or irreversible, soluble or non-soluble, covalent or non-covalent. Moreover, the protein can aggregate either in the native or in the non-native state. Although major advances have been made in the last decades, a comprehensive understanding of protein aggregation is still lacking and aggregation inhibition is mainly achieved by productspecific optimization. A better knowledge of protein aggregation mechanism is therefore desired for the biopharmaceutical industry. The goal of this project is to understand the mechanisms and kinetics of protein aggregation at a fundamental level with a view to optimizing operative parameters during downstream processing and final product formulation. Of particular interest is the development of methods for shelf-life prediction and for optimizing the stability of formulations at large protein drugs concentrations. On this purpose, the effects of various operative parameters such as pH, buffer composition or temperature on the protein stability behavior are characterized by several biophysical techniques among which Dynamic and Static Light Scattering, Chromatography, Field Flow Fractionation, fluorescence and absorbance assays, Circular Dichroism, Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy, SDS-PAGE, Electron Microscopy and Atomic Force Microscopy. The experimental characterization is rationalized and interpreted in the frame of mass action models based on a population balance approach.
