Pathmate The project has the objective to develop a Ubiquitous Healthcare Information System (UHIS) that has a positive effect on the performance of obesity expert and teenager teams. The current project has the objective to develop a Ubiquitous Healthcare Information System (UHIS) that has a positive effect on the performance of obesity expert and teenager teams. Group performance is measured by (1) believes on group cohesion and group commitment and (2) the outcome of an obesity program, i.e. teenagerSs health condition. The UHIS will be developed in the context of individual obesity therapy and prevention programs for teenagers from 11 to 17 in Switzerland. The research model that is applied in the PathMate project is depicted in Figure 1 and distinguishes three views: 1. Domain view: healthcare constructs that are relevant for a healthcare situation 2. Individual view: individual mental representations of a healthcare situation, therapy, goals, procedures etc. 3. Group view: shared understanding of a healthcare situation, therapy, goals, procedures etc. This research model starts from an asymmetric group situation in which an obesity expert has specialized knowledge that frames a normative mental model of an obesity intervention program. This normative mental model includes the course of action (intervention), goals, resources, as well as time frames and has to be shared by the expert with the teenager. In this principal-agent situation, a teenager has the task to adopt this normative mental model so that a shared mental model starts to exist. On group level, a cross-understanding is being developed based upon individual understandings. It is argued that shared mental models and cross-understanding affect group performance in principal-agent situations. Subjective measures of group performance are believes on group cohesion and group commitment and expert knowledge acquired by the teenager. Objective measures of group performance are characteristics of the outcome of an obesity program such as a subjectSs health condition measured by BMI, fat mass or steps per day.
