Non-Destructive Testing of Post-tensioned Cables by Time Domaine Reflectometry Most load bearing reinforced concrete structures are post-tensioned. Despite their importance for structural safety, the engineer cannot obtain reliable information on the corrosion state of post tensioned cables when assessing their conditions. Thus a rapid, non-destructive technique for examining post tensioned cables is urgently needed. Time Domain Reflectometry (TDR), known from applications to coaxial telecommunication cables has been tested under the name RIMT for grouted post-tensioned cables. After a first research project in 1988 it became obvious that the physical / electrotechnical fundamentals of the technique applied to post-tensioned cables were insufficiently understood. In the new project, laboratory experiments were designed in order to separate the two main problems geometry and dielectric behaviour . For ideal coaxial arrangement of the cable and the shield the experimental results agreed with the laws of physics of wave propagation for dielectric media air or water. High frequency signals of over 100 MHz could be transmitted. The use of injection grout as dielectric material resulted in a strong amplitude reduction and dispersion of the high frequency pulses already after 2 m. Spatial resolution was in the order of the probe length. Thus the high loss injection grout makes the detection of cable defects and the spatial resolution very questionable. Tests on new structures with fully insulated post-tensioned cables with polyethylene ducts showed that in addition to the strong amplitude reduction a problem of undefined geometry for impulse propagation exists. Wave propagation occurred radially around the cable, no defined wave propagation impedance exists for such an arrangement and thus a linear relation between time of reflected signals and distance along the cable no longer holds. For existing structures another problem, the electrical conduction between the cables and the rebars, complicates the situation even further. It has to be concluded that the recorded signals of time domain reflectometry (RIMT) on grouted post-tensioned cables do not contain information regarding the condition of the cable but are artefacts of the measurement procedure. Thus RIMT cannot be used as a diagnostic technique for grouted cables. The following conditions must be fulfilled for the successful application of RIMT: first, a coaxial geometrical arrangement between cable and duct, and second the use of a highly insulating, low-loss material between cable and duct. These conditions might be fulfilled for monostrands.
