Using the Next Generation Proteomics Data Analysis Strategies U Power of Multiple Search Strategies Development of new strategies and algorithms for the combination of database search results with the goal of achieving confident protein identification based on mass spectrometry data. One of the most popular approaches to protein identification considers a database search against the protein database of an organism. It was shown before that the overlap of different search algorithms is surprisingly small. Furthermore, in a complex biological sample up to 30% of the proteins are only identified by a single peptide. Especially these assignments are critical in proteomics studies. A comprehensive analysis of several model organism proteomics datasets reveals that the false discovery rate can be decreased dramatically as well as the number of proteins can be increased if peptide identifications only are accepted if more than one search engine confirms the identification. In this study five search engines were used (Sequest (Eng, Mccormack et al. 1994), Mascot (Perkins, Pappin et al. 1999), X!Tandem (Craig and Beavis 2004), omssa (Geer, Markey et al. 2004) the latter three are open source) and a list of most conand PepSplice (Roos, Jacob et al. 2007) U fidently identified MS/MS scans were generated for each search engine. At the FGCZ we envision new strategies and algorithms for the combination of database search results with the goal to have more confident protein identification. References: Craig, R. and R. C. Beavis (2004). TANDEM: matching proteins with tandem mass spectra. Bioinformatics 20(9): 1466-7. Eng, J. K., A. L. Mccormack, et al. (1994). An Approach to Correlate Tandem Mass-Spectral Data of Peptides with Amino-Acid-Sequences in a Protein Database. Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry 5(11): 976-989. Geer, L. Y., S. P. Markey, et al. (2004). Open mass spectrometry search algorithm. J Proteome Res 3(5): 958-64. Perkins, D. N., D. J. Pappin, et al. (1999). Probability-based protein identification by searching sequence databases using mass spectrometry data. Electrophoresis 20(18): 3551-67. Roos, F. F., R. Jacob, et al. (2007). PepSplice: Cache-Efficient Search Algorithms for Comprehensive Identificationof Tandem Mass Spectra. Bioinformatics.
