Transport and correlations in mesoscopic superconducting and normal-metallic structures We study transport, noise, and the Full Counting Statistics in mesoscopic (superconducting) devices. Special emphasis is on novel quantum phenomena such as the behavior of single-electron pulses, effects of interaction, and entanglement. Our research focuses on the design and functionality of mesoscopic solid state devices, their transport and noise properties, and their potential use in quantum information theory. We have suggested specific mesoscopic structures allowing for the study of basic quantum phenomena such as (the generation of) entanglement and wave function collapse and have shown how to test for the non-classical correlations through the use of a Bell inequality test based on currentcurrent cross correlators. Devices for entanglement generation and analysis include normal-metal­ superconductor junctions, normal-metal structures in a fork geometry, and four-lead splitters with a time delayed analysis; both, dc and pulsed production of entangled pairs have been studied. We have unveiled the relation between the fidelity (stability under perturbation) of a quantum system and the generating function of full counting statistics (FCS) and have analyzed the possibility of their measurement using a quantum bit as a measurement device. With our new wave function approach to the full counting statistics, we have studied the transmission of identical particles across an energy and time dependent scatterer: we have studied effects due to exchange symmetry for two and N particles, have fully characterized the case of two-Fermion scattering, and have studied the constant voltage limit, including effects of time dependent counting. Most recently, we have calculated the full counting statistics of charge transport under the influence of two-level fluctuators and have studied the generation of single-particle excitations through designed voltage pulses. Our recent work relates in various ways to single-electron pulses which are of great potential use in quantum information processing. We have derived an exact expression for the N-particle scattering matrix for electrons interacting on a quantum dot and are pursuing similar work to include the effect of a Fermi sea. We have found a new scheme allowing to reconstruct a decohered single particle wave function with the help of a classical voltage pulse. Inspired by the problem of statistical counting (FCS), we have developed a quantum counting algorithm, a non-demolitian measurement of the cardinality of a stream of particles (electrons) passing through a wire. The binary counting with qubits can be extended to base-d counting with qudits. Applications include a factorization of numbers, the generation of multi-particle entanglement, and new measurement strategies in quantum systems, i.e., quantum metrology.
