EURYI Project: Molecules in Magnetized Solar and Stellar Atmospheres Molecules are found in a large variety of astronomical objects, ranging from comets in the solar system to galaxies at high red shifts and including the Sun and cool stars. We develop the theory of molecular magnetic interactions and diagnostic tools, and establish a new field in astrophysics. Molecules play a unique role in solar and stellar spectroscopy. They allow deriving temperature inhomogeneities in stellar atmospheres and offer an excellent opportunity to determine chemical compositions. In the presence of a magnetic field many molecular spectral lines exhibit the Zeeman effect and, thus, are useful to diagnose cool magnetized stellar atmospheres. Although recently significant progress has been made, the quantum theory of the molecular Zeeman effect is still not fully developed, especially for strong magnetic fields, when internal molecular momenta strongly interact with an external magnetic field, i.e. in the case of the molecular Paschen-Back effect. The subject is now beginning to arouse considerable interest, giving some urgency to further develop the theory of the molecular Zeeman effect and to apply the parts of the theory, which are already established. One aim of our project is to extend the theory of the molecular Paschen-Back effect to different spin coupling cases and different multiplicities, as at the moment only doublet transitions have been studied. This will allow us to develop new diagnostic techniques for studying solar and stellar magnetic fields with the molecular Zeeman, Paschen-Back and Hanle effects. To this end we develop several applications. For the Sun, we use molecular lines to probe the thermal and magnetic structure of the coolest parts of sunspots at field strengths of 2-3 kG. Simultaneous inversions of Stokes profiles of atomic and molecular lines observed in the spectra of solar umbrae and penumbrae can significantly improve the current models of sunspots. Also, we propose to study turbulent magnetic fields in the quiet Sun with the help of the molecular Hanle effect, which is observed as a modification of the scattering polarization in molecular lines in the presence of a magnetic field. For cool stars with magnetic activity, we use molecular lines for direct measurements of magnetic fields in spatially unresolved starspots, which for the first time will provide insight into the internal structure of starspots. Further, since molecular lines dominate the spectra of red and brown dwarfs, we intend to search for net circular and linear polarization in molecular bands, which will help to determine the magnetic field strength in these fully convective stars. Up to now, there exist no measurements of magnetic fields on brown dwarfs. One more application is proposed for cool magnetic white dwarfs with molecular bands in their spectra. This will allow us to study molecules at field strengths of several MG.
