Changes in Radiation and Heat Budget of the Earth since the International Geophysical Year (IGY) Investigation of major problems in earth's energy balance by reconstructing high-resolution energy budget for the earth's surface and its variations. The major questions are 1) missing absorption; 2) cloud radiative forcing; 3) evidence of the enhanced greenhouse effect; 4) trend in evaporation. That the radiation and the energy budget of the earth plays an important role in forming the climate has been proven by numerical experiments and by analyses associated with major climatic episodes. The fact that all major climate changes are basically caused by alteration of radiation also proves this point. The Milankovich hypothesis is an example of a climate change by altering shortwave radiation, and enhanced greenhouse effect is another example by changing longwave radiation. Climate internal variations are likely to fluctuate within the range that will be constrained by the given radiative conditions. The past works on radiation and energy budget stressed obtaining climatologically stable pictures of the energy budget averaged over a substantially long period. These earlier works were necessary to clarify the mean conditions of the energy budget, and in this way they played an important role. Presently, however, a new awareness of the relationships between the energy budget and the global climate emerged. These relationships are 1) ocean surface heat fluxes and El Nino and El Nino type oscillations; 2) the similar relationships in the North Atlantic Oscillation (NOA) and Arctic Oscillation (AO), 3) the climatic effect of certain volcanic eruptions, and 4) the cloud radiative forcing paradox, that is, the observation that the global cloud amount increased from l960 to l990, and shortwave incoming radiation decrease, while air temperature increased; 5) a shift in the energy budget in the enhanced greenhouse climate, to mention just a few. The comparison of recent works on radiation budget with earlier ones also evoked a new problem, such as missing absorption (of solar radiation by the atmosphere). Earlier works might have substantially underestimated the atmospheric absorption of solar radiation, one of the most fundamental processes. There is, however, a possibility that the atmosphere the earlier workers observed may have changed in the course of the last half century. To answer these questions, the classic energy budget climatology with a static picture is quite powerless. In an effort to acquire climatologically stable mean conditions, important short-term processes and long-term variations were smeared out. Naturally, earlier workers did not have accurate material to evaluate the variations of the energy budget for shorter or longer terms. The time has changed, however. If the energy budget climatology is to live up to the importance this process is believed to play in the climate system, a new point of view must be adopted. Besides, there are important issues in non-radiative energy fluxes, such as evapotranspiration and the possibility of its change with time in the warming climate. Another important issue is the possibility that the global radiation balance may not be at equilibrium, as the energy is transferred into the ocean and latent heat of fusion in a transient climate. The applicants believe that the analysis of the monthly global distributions of energy fluxes made for each year, instead of climatic means over many years, will become an essential part of the study of climatic variations from the several years to a decadal scale. The longest satellite-based irradiances are those produced by the International Satellite Cloud Climatology Project (ISCCP). The ISCCP Level D2 global mean statistics indicate that this is one of the most promising information sources for the earth's surface radiation budget, covering almost two decades. The preliminary analysis of the monthly and regional validation shows that the ISCCP D2 is not only important for the TOA but also offers surprisingly accurate irradiances for the earth's surface. There are some errors but they can be systematically corrected. The investigation of the reproducibility of the surface fluxes by various GCMs and Analyses shows that ECMWF Re-analysis (ERA15) offers the most realistic global annual statistics. Further inve- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> stigations of latitudinally averaged fluxes validated against the surface measurements also show that ERA15 is possibly the most reliable information source among many Analyses and clearly superior to the National Centers for Environmental Prediction/National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCEP) Reanalysis or NASA's GEOS. During summer 2003, ERA40 has become available. Nevertheless, ERA15 gives in fact a better agreement with high quality observations than ERA40. This is one of the puzzles we are confronted. During the last 15 years the meteorological network saw a rather substantial increase in radiation networks. There have been organised projects, such as US Department of Energy's Atmospheric Radiation Measurements (ARM) Program, NOAA's SURFRAD Project, NASA's AERONET, Japanese SKYNET and WCRP's Baseline Surface Radiation Network (BSRN). These projects are more than 5 to 10 years in operation. For more than 10 years, 37 measuring sites in BSRN are producing high-accuracy and quality assured irradiances. BSRN measures not only radiation, but also relevant atmospheric characteristics that are necessary to compute irradiances based on theoretical schemes. International Advanced Flux Network and Flux Evaluation (FLUXNET) was established in 1995. This group has been measuring surface turbulent fluxes since 1996 at various sites in the world under sub-programs, EuroFlux, AmeriFlux, MedeFlux and AsiaFlux. Each these sub-programs identified 20 to 37 sites for long-term measurements of turbulent fluxes. The primary objective of this project is to measure greenhouse gas fluxes, based on the eddy-covariance method over representative vegetation surfaces. The project also measures radiation, sensible and latent heat fluxes. Some of these fluxes were already used to evaluate GCM performances, and proven to be of a reliable standard. There has not been a time in the past when so many high quality fluxes have been measured simultaneously at so many locations as at present. There are four fundamental issues to be solved, each related to most important processes in physical climatology, water vapour, aerosol, clouds and greenhouse gas: 1. Missing absorption: The fact that the atmosphere absorbs more solar radiation than previously believed (96 W m-2 instead of 60 to 70 W m-2) is unmistakable. This point is still misunderstood even by radiation specialists. The main point is that the atmosphere absorbs much more solar radiation without involving clouds. A serious question is if our teachers' generation missed so much important absorption. This is partly true, because we found more absorption in H2O: 3.2¸ tm and 6.3 ¸ tm bands. However, there is some additional absorption which must be explained. The absorption in the water vapour continuum in the shortwave range is one possibility. There is a possibility that the atmosphere changed over the last half-century. This may well be the reason why our new global radiation budget is different from Budyko's work. This may also be the reason why contemporary measurements agree much better with ERA15 than ERA40. This is the subject which requires a study of water vapour, clouds and aerosol, by going back to the observations and computations into 1950s. 2. Cloud radiative forcing paradox: It is by now well established that global shortwave radiation has been decreasing since IGY. At the same time the global cloud amount was increasing at least up until the end of 1980s. These two trends appear harmonious. It is, however, not straightforward to understand that the temperature was increasing during this time. The climate system was not following a simple cloud radiative forcing scheme. Probably the solution of this paradox c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> demands understanding of interactions between the cloud, greenhouse gases and temperature. An interesting natural experiment is that the global cloud amount started to decrease in early 1990s. As 10 years have passed since the decreasing trend of cloud started, there is sufficient material to study how both increasing and decreasing cloud conditions influence the earth's surface radiation balance and temperature. 3. Proof of anthropogenic greenhouse effect: By now 12 years have passed since BSRN started. Since this network has a capability of measuring longwave atmospheric radiation with accuracy ´ 3 W m-2, it is possible to detect the change (increase?) in atmospheric radiation under better than s increasing greenhouse effect. Up to now all what we know is that the greenhouse gas concentration and temperature are both increasing. The most important radiative processes are missing in this thought. To evaluate if our understanding of the longwave radiation processes as was coded in climate models, is correct, we must see if the longwave counter radiation increased as the theory predicted. The theory of greenhouse effect is simple but the change of radiation in reality is more complex, especially because of the poorly understood roles by clouds. 4. The authentic and classic view of the direct consequence of the increase in the longwave atmospheric radiation is the heating of the earth's surface. The heating of the surface is, however, retarded, as a substantial portion of the radiative heating will be expended into the atmosphere mainly through the increase in evaporation and less importantly by sensible heat flux. The understanding on this process on the earth's surface is presently missing. There is a controversy about the possible direction of the evaporation change. This process has a direct consequence on the degree to which the earth's surface will be heated. This question compels us to study the actual evapotranspiration, and not potential evaporation or water pan evaporation. One of the most promising methods is to analyse the long-term time series of micro-meteorologically observed evapotranspiration measured at about 20 locations in the world. The above presented items are related to water vapour, aerosol, clouds and greenhouse gas, all important components in the climate system. The solution of the problems demands not only the understanding of physics in the present atmosphere, but the investigation of radiation balance in the changing temperature, gas concentration, aerosol and clouds. The applicants are convinced that the period of last 45 years is the ideally suited for these problems.
