Handling Uncertainty in Structural System Modeling The main goal of this work is the treatment of uncertainties related to structural response by reduced oprder models enhanced with a probablistic framework for the description of uncertainty propagation. Due to reasons related with manufacturing or construction processes, ageing processes, loading conditions, boundary conditions, measurement errors, and others, almost every structural system is characterized by uncertainty. The propagation of uncertainty through the structural system gives rise to corresponding uncertainties of the structural dynamics and in general the behavior of the structure. As a result, we may only have a limited degree of confidence in the condition, reliability and safety of a structure through its whole life cycle. For this reason, the necessity for developing dynamic structural models able to additionally encompass the aforementioned uncertainties has been already highlighted by the international research community over the last years. The main goal of this work is the treatment of both structural and excitation uncertainties by developing time-series models with random parameters utilized for the description of uncertainty propagation. The introduced models are able to describe both types of uncertainties by the expansion of their random parameters onto polynomial chaos basis [1]. The final objective of the study is twofold: (i) the handling of uncertainty in large-scale numerical models that may be used for design optimization of new structures toward a more reliable response even for extreme loading conditions such as earthquakes, or strong wind loads, and (ii) the representation of existing structures by means of a reduced order black-box model that will be able to describe the structural dynamics for a great percentage of its operational spectrum. R. Li, R. Ghanem, Adaptive polynomial chaos expansions applied to statistics of extremes in nonlinear random vibration, Probabilistic Engineering Mechanics, Vol. 13, No. 2, (1998), pp. 125-136.
