Biological functions and mechanisms of action of keratinocyte growth factor (fibroblast growth factor 7) In this project we study the biological functions of keratinocyte growth factor in organ homeostasis, tissue repair and in human inflammatory disease. Using cell culture models and genetically modified mice, we determine the mechanisms of action of keratinocyte growth factor at the cellular level. Keratinocyte growth factor (KGF), a member of the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) family of mitogens (FGF7), is a secreted protein which is produced by various types of mesenchymal cells and by gammadelta T cells, but not by epithelial cells. However, most types of epithelial cells express FGFR2IIIb, the only known high-affinity receptor for KGF. We and others demonstrated a weak expression of KGF in murine and human skin. However, expression of this mitogen was strikingly induced in dermal fibroblasts upon skin injury (Werner et al., 1992). By contrast, the KGF receptor was exclusively expressed on keratinocytes of the epidermis and the hair follicles, suggesting that dermally derived KGF stimulates wound reepithelialization in a paracrine manner. This hypothesis was strongly supported by the wound healing phenotype seen in transgenic mice which express a dominant-negative KGF receptor in the basal keratinocytes of the epidermis and in the outer root sheath keratinocytes of the hair follicles. These animals had a severe delay in wound reepithelialization, demonstrating the importance of KGF receptor signalling during cutaneous wound repair (Werner et al., 1994). Surprisingly, results from another laboratory demonstrated that mice lacking KGF have no obvious phenotypic abnormalities, and even the healing process of incisional wounds appeared normal, suggesting that other KGF receptor ligands can compensate for the lack of KGF. The most likely candidate for such a compensatory effect is FGF10, since this FGF family member is (i) highly homologous to KGF, (ii) co-expressed with KGF in adult mouse tissues (Beer et al., 1997), and (iii) a high-affinity ligand of the KGF receptor (Beer et al., 2000, and others). Furthermore, a second homologue of KGF, FGF-22 has recently been discovered, and we have shown this new FGF to be expressed in normal and wounded skin (Beyer et al., 2003). In summary, these results demonstrated an important role of KGF receptor ligands in wound repair, although the precise function of each ligand in this process remains to be determined.To gain insight into the mechanisms of KGF and FGF-10 action in normal and wounded skin we searched for genes which are regulated by these factors in cultured keratinocytes. For this purpose we used the differential display RT-PCR technology and we also generated a subtractive cDNA library from quiescent and KGF-treated keratinocytes. We identified several unknown genes but also various known genes which might help to explain how KGF mediates various processes in normal and wounded skin, such as keratinocyte proliferation and migration, protection from the toxic effects of reactive oxygen species, and indirect effects such as angiogenesis and stimulation of matrix deposition. The KGF-regulated genes and their possible functions in normal and wounded skin are described below. a.) Genes which are involved in the regulation of keratinocyte proliferation and migration. Several genes were identified which are likely to be involved in the mitogenic effect of KGF. One of the genes encodes adenylosuccinate lyase, an enzyme involved in purine de novo synthesis and in the salvage pathway. To determine whether regulation of enzymes involved in nucleotide biosynthesis is a general mechanism of KGF action we cloned cDNA probes of the key regulatory enzymes involved in this metabolic pathway. Interestingly, the expression of all of these enzymes was strongly induced by KGF in cultured keratinocytes. This regulation is likely to be important for the in vivo situation, since we found high levels of the corresponding transcripts in the KGFresponsive keratinocytes of the hyperproliferative epithelium of healing skin wounds (Gassmann and Werner, 1999). These findings suggest that KGF also stimulates the synthesis of enzymes involved in nucleotide biosynthesis during wound healing, which should allow the production of suf- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> ficient amounts of nucleotides required for various processes such as DNA replication and RNA synthesis. In addition to these nucleotide biosynthesis enzymes, we identified a putative human homologue of the yeast CHL-1 gene as a KGF-regulated gene (Frank and Werner, 1996). In the yeast, this gene is involved in the regulation of chromosome segregation and cell cycle progression, suggesting that a human homologue might have a similar function in keratinocytes. Furthermore, expression of the membrane protein caveolin, which is involved in the regulation of various signal transduction processes, was shown to be regulated by KGF (Gassmann and Werner, 2000). Finally, we identified the gene encoding the estrogen-responsive B-box protein as a target of KGF action in keratinocytes and we demonstrated a role of this protein in the regulation of keratinocyte differentiation (Beer et al., 2002). The analysis of the biochemical properties and biological functions of this novel molecule is a current focus of our research (H.-D. Beer).With regard to the stimulatory effect of KGF on keratinocyte migration, we found a KGF-mediated increase in the expression of the matrix metalloproteinase stromelysin-2 (Madlener et al., 1996; Madlener and Werner, 1997; Madlener et al., 1997). The latter is normally expressed a in migrating keratinocytes at the wound edge where it is likely to be responsible for the degradation of the provisional matrix, a function which is essential for migration of keratinocytes into the wound. b.) Genes which mediate the protective effect of KGF. An important feature of KGF is its cytoprotective effect for various types of epithelial cells, including epithelial cells of the gut, the lung, and the bladder. Furthermore, recent results from our laboratory suggest that KGF can reduce oxidative damage in keratinocytes. These observations suggested that KGF can induce the expression of enzymes involved in the detoxification of reactive oxygen species. To test this possibility, we analyzed the effect of KGF on the expression of catalase, peroxidases and superoxide dismutases. Although we found an interesting expression pattern of these enzymes in healing wounds (Steiling et al., 1999), none of these enzymes was regulated by KGF at the transcriptional level. However, we identified the gene encoding peroxiredoxin VI as a novel KGF-regulated gene using the differential display RT-PCR technology (Frank et al., 1997). The upregulation of this enzyme by KGF is likely to be important in vivo, since the enzyme is strongly overexpressed in the hyperproliferative epithelium of murine skin wounds and of psoriatic human skin, where KGF is strongly expressed (Munz et al., 1997). These results suggest that KGF reduces the toxic effects of reactive oxygen species at least in part by upregulation of this enzyme. Another gene, which is likely to play a major role in the protective effect of KGF encodes the transcription factor Nrf-2. The latter is an important regulator of various enzymes that are involved in the detoxification of reactive oxygen species. Recently, we found an important role of Nrf-2 in the regulation of inflammation and gene expression in wounded skin (Braun et al., 2002). Our present studies focus on the role of this transcription factor in the cytoprotective effect of KGF. c.) Genes which mediate indirect effects of KGF. In addition to its direct effects on keratinocytes, studies from other laboratories demonstrated indirect effects of exogenously applied KGF or FGF10, respectively, on the granulation tissue. Since KGF is likely to act only on epithelial cells in the wound, the observed stimulation of granulation tissue formation might be a result of other factors which are produced by keratinocytes in response to KGF. Indeed, we previously demonstrated a striking upregulation of vascular endothelial growth factor expression by KGF in cultured HaCaT keratinocytes, suggesting that KGF can indirectly stimulate angiogenesis via VEGF induction (Frank et al., 1995). Furthermore, we demonstrated induction of TGF-b1 and activin expression by KGF in cultured keratinocytes (Huebner and Werner, 1996). Since both of these factors stimulate production of extracellular matrix molecules in fibroblasts, they might be at least partially respon- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> sible for the increased collagen deposition seen in KGF-treated wounds.
