IMPRESSIONS: Impact and risks of high-end climate change scenarios for forest ecosystems. It is becoming increasingly unlikely that we will meet the emissions targets necessary to keep climate change to less than 2 degrees. We are using a variety of forest models to assess how forests will respond to high-end climate change scenarios and how management can mitigate some of these impacts. IMPRESSIONS is a project funded under the 7th Framework Programme of the EU. It is a 5 year project, which started in November 2013 and includes 24 partners from 16 countries. The overall aim of the project is to improve our understanding of the impacts, risks, vulnerability and adaptation options that are associated with high-end climate change scenarios. High end climate change scenarios (> 2 degree C warming) are becoming increasingly plausible, however there are relatively few studies which examine the impacts of these scenarios. IMPRESSIONS aims to fill this gap by achieving the following: - Create a set of integrated high-end climate and socio-economic scenarios which can be applied at the global, European and regional scale. - Quantify cross-sectoral impacts, risks, vulnerabilities and uncertainties associated with high-end scenarios - Include adaptation in the models by considering constraints, triggers, time lags and consequences - Assess the current policies under high-end scenarios and identify new transformative solutions The Forest Ecology professorship at ETHZ is a partner in this project. We are involved in WP3 (Climate Change Impact Modelling) and will be providing simulation results about the impact of high-end climate change on forests to the European case study and two of the regional case studies (Iberia and Scotland). In general, we will address the following questions: - How do high-end climate scenarios impact tree growth and survival? - How effective are different management options for mitigating the impacts of climate change (i.e. changes to tree composition, forest or landscape management)?
