Asking Sensitive Questions: Possibilities and Limits of Randomized Response and Other Techniques in Different Survey Modes. Subproject 1: Online Surveys. Priority Programme on Survey Methodology (PPSM) of the German Research Foundation (DFG) The goal of the project is to develop, test and compare different instruments and techniques of asking questions about sensitive behavior and attitudes in online surveys. The goal of the project is to develop, test and compare different instruments and techniques of asking questions about sensitive behavior and attitudes in online surveys. Typically in surveys people underreport socially undesirable activities and attitudes because they do not trust the promise of confidentiality and feel ashamed or personally threatened by disclosure. Against the background of the broader context of survey research on sensitive topics, we compare the randomized response technique (RRT) with other techniques of asking sensitive questions, such as direct questioning. We evaluate the quality of the information obtained with the different technique/mode-combinations in terms of a reduction of non-response and response bias. In the case of a successful implementation, we expect higher point estimates of the sensitive attributes on the aggregate level in the RRT-conditions. To develop RRT formats appropriate for online surveys is a special challenge. It is well-known that online surveys are rapidly proliferating in the field of survey research (e.g. Dillman 2000; Couper and Coutts 2006). It is therefore time to explore the viability of the RRT for this survey mode. Online surveys are self-administered surveys. Similar to mailed questionnaires, respondents may not perceive their anonymity to be protected and answers to sensitive questions may be biased. To account for sampling problems, online-surveys are often distributed to members of a web- panel who are sampled offline. In addition, the online mode is frequently applied to samples of e-mail addresses from organizations such as a survey of scientists from research institutes or a sample of employees of a corporation. Because of the sampling frame, respondents often face problems of anonymity concerning threatening questions. We assume the use of the RRT to increase answer validity by providing a credible guarantee of anonymity, although the extent to which this guarantee is required in online surveys is still unknown. The main problems with employing the RRT online seem to be practical. As mentioned, in face-to-face surveys an interviewer or researcher is present to explain the general logic of the RRT, to answer questions about the technique, and to show the respondent how to use the randomizing device. Given the absence of an interviewer in online surveys, great care needs to be taken in formulating convincing instructions for and explanations of the RRT. And, since no researcher is present to make sure the randomizing device is properly applied, thought needs to be given to the selection of intelligent, understandable, easy-to-use, and convenient randomizing devices.
