UnAVoSo High voltage, high current arbitrary voltage source for hardware-in-theloop test systems for HVDC circuit breakers With the constantly growing share of renewable energy sources, the supply of electrical energy is changing from centralized conventional generation based on e.g. coal or nuclear power to distributed and fluctuating renewable energy sources as solar or wind. This change also involves a change in the power transmission and distribution systems. Electrical energy from regenerative sources is often generated far away from the major demand areas as e.g. big cities. The existing AC grid reaches its limits by performing this transportation task. To solve this problems more and more high voltage DC transmission systems (HVDC) could be used in future. Such connections are mainly limited to a point to point transfer at the moment. There are several visions and plans to expand such HVDC transmission lines to DC super grids, which e.g. could cover Europe and even reach North of Africa. But to realize this grid, circuit breakers are necessary to have the possibility to interrupt parts of the grid, if there is a failure. Existing circuit breakers are mainly designed for AC grids, so that further research in this area is required. For investigating DC circuit breaker concepts under realistic conditions in detail, test systems, which allow simulating the interruption of high power DC grids under failure mode, are essential. The aim of this research project is to identify new concepts and topologies for a hardware-in-theloop test system for DC circuit breakers. There, very challenging voltage and current ratings of more than 30kA at voltage levels up to 10kV must be provided at operating frequencies in the range of several kHz. In an initial step, modular multi-level inverters in combination with high frequency low voltage converters for voltage shaping are investigated for generating the arbitrary voltage/current waveforms. The high amount of energy required during the tests is provided by capacitor banks.
