The Influence of Process Parameters on Structure and Rheology of Protein Based Food Foams Protein based food foam products (angel kisses, baiser, marshmallows, mousse products, etc.) are industrially produced in continuous rotor/stator gas dispersing (whipping-) units. The gas dispersion is carried out in a turbulent flow field in the rotor/stator gaps. The important process parameters are: rotational speed, residence time / volume flow rate, temperature and pressure / backpressure. The aim of the project is to study the influence of these process parameters as well as the influence of the geometry of the rotor/stator system on the resulting foam properties under different conditions for the pre-treatment (= recipe conditions) of the proteins used. The main foam properties considered are the bubble size distribution, the mean bubble size, the foam stability (drainage behaviour) and the foam rheology. In a first project step, the proteins used (mainly milkbased) were analytically characterized to quantify their degree of nativity and characteristic properties important for the foaming ability (hydrophobicity, molecular weight, hydrodynamic volume). In a second step, a pilot plant process line was built up. In this process all the important process parameters and additional control parameters could be monitored. Especially for on-line control of the foam structure, conductivity based measuring cells were developed and adapted. Systematic experiments are carried out in the third step. A statistical experimental design combined with a principal component analysis were used to get an overview of the relationships between recipe-(protein type, pH, overrun) and pre-treatment parameters (diff. heat treatment), process parameters (temperatures, pressure, rotational speed (rotor), residence time), process control parameters (conductivity) and the resulting foam properties (drainage stability, bubble size distribution, conductivity, rheology). On the basis of these results criteria are developed for the optimisation of the recipe, the whipping apparatus geometry and the process parameters with respect to good foam stability, rheology and sensorial properties.
