Orientation and Interaction Behaviour of Rodlike Particles in Complex Shear Flows An essential part of foods contains rodlike particles like fibres (e.g. in cereals, doughs, spreads, sauces, dressings. In the processing of such products the food industry deals with problems based on the non Newtonian shear thinning and thixotropic behaviour caused by the orientation of the shaped particles in laminar flows (e.g. in extrusion, pipe transport, mixing and stirring, dispersing). Another field of interest is the production of biomaterials (packing industry) where a controlled structuring (orientation) of fibres determines the mechanical properties of the final product. Investigations of the behaviour of single-fibre systems (fibre in viscous fluid) give a basis for the understanding of complex multi-fibre systems. In a first step, the examined fibre is placed in a linear steady state shear field of a Newtonian fluid generated in a specially developed flow cell which is connected to a microscope. The measurement of the fibre movement (orientation angle related to the direction of the streamlines) is carried out by the means of digital image processing. The parameters of interest are the viscosity of the fluid (respectively viscosity function), the difference in density of particle and fluid, and most important the dimensions of the rodlike particles. The complexity of the system is increased with the use of non-Newtonian and viscoelastic fluids. The laser light sheet technique allows the observation of the fibre movement behaviour in a transparent tube (Poiseuille flow) or an annular gap. The application of stereoscopic picture recording will finally allow a reconstruction of the three dimensional movement of the fibre in the flow. In food processing, when shear induced structuring of the product is involved, the interactions of the fibres in the flow appear to be relevant to the properties of the final product. Our investigations will therefore focus on the different possibilities to influence the flow (and hence the orientation of the fibres) in order to get the desired characterisation of the resulting product. The parameters to be influenced are: the type of deformation (e.g. shear flow, extensional flow), the magnitude of the deformation (i.e. the applied forces) and the structure of the medium itself (e.g. length of the fibres, rheology of the continuous phase). Furthermore the understanding of the orientation mechanisms will improve the knowledge of shear structuring and related rheological material functions. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2>
