Archaeological Analysis of the monastery St. Johann, Müstair GR At its founding, the Institute for the Preservation of Historic Monuments and Sites ETHZ assumed a share in the Müstair program. Further research in this area of concentration has two aims: Archaeological examination of the entire monastery complex in view of a clarification of its architectural history and preparations for restoration and, in parallel, the instruction of middle and senior cadre and archaeological students. The present state of the work is explained in a recent publication, with a first section on the previously known principal facts of the architectural history of the Kloster complex and a second section presenting the final treatment of the late Bronze age post building ("Pfostengebäude") along with the small finds it contained. See now: Müstair, Kloster St. Johann, Vol. 1: Zur Klosteranlage. Vorklösterliche Befunde (Veröffentlichungen des Inst. f. Denkmalpflege an der ETHZ, Vol.16.1), Zürich 1996; H.R. Sennhauser (Ed.): Wohn- und Wirtschaftsbauten frühmittelalterlicher Klöster. Acta des intern. Symposiums, 26.9.-1.10.1995 (Veröffentl. des Inst. f. Denkmalpflege an der ETHZ, Vol. 17), Zürich 1996. After the completion of the present work, three major complexes will remain: 1) The buildings surrounding the northern courtyard (with the socalled Norperttrakt in the westwing). 2) The partly proven and partly assumed older remains to the north and east of the present day monastery. In the southeast remains the Holycrosschapel to investigate. 3) Before beginning the archaeological examination of the church, and as a preparation for restoration, the conditions for the future preservation of the mural paintings will be analysed through climatic measurements by the Technological Laboratory of the Institute. To complete the fieldwork a 6 year program related to the Convent buildings was presented. A second 6-7 year program includes the preparation of results related to the living and working buildings. Method: Increased employment of CAD in preparations. Present financing is through the Swiss National Fund and the ETHZ. For several years, the Bundesamt für Kultur has been a contributor and, since 1994, also the Kanton Graubünden. Place: Müstair
