Algorithms for the simulation of classical and quantum many body problems We develop new numerical techniques that allow to simulate efficiently large quantum systems. Amongst others, we work on Quantum Monte Carlo, DMRG and Series Expansion methods. For testing new algorithms, we also examine their performances on simpler classical problems. The simulation of quantum many body problems poses a big challenge, since in a direct calculation the dimension of the Hilbert space grows exponentially with the number of particles. Several techniques have appeared over the last 15 years that can circumvent this problem in some cases. One family of such techniques is Quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) methods: QMC simulations can reduce the algorithmic efforts to polynomial scaling, but pose other challenges, such as critical slowing down at second order phase transitions, long tunneling times from metastable states at first order phase transitions, and the negative sign problem. We are working on these three challenges. While we make progress on the first problem with the development of new quantum cluster algorithms, and on the second problem with a quantum version of multicanonical (Wang-Landau) sampling, we have found that the negative sign problem is NP-hard, and thus probably in general intractable. More specifically, we are working on : Wang-Landau sampling for quantum systems (algorithms to overcome tunneling problems and calculate the free energy) Directed loop or worm algorithm for Quantum Monte Carlo simulations On the other hand, it is also very useful to test new ideas and new algorithms on classical problems, because it can provide some general grounds or limitations on scaling and usefulness of such new algorithms. We therefore investigate the quality of new algorithms on classical statistical c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> physics systems. In particular, we work on the following projects: Directed classical worm algorithm for two - dimensional lattice models Optimizing statistical ensembles to efficiently calculate the density of states
