Running Robot In one sentence: A Robot is to be build, tested and programmed in Oberon with learning algorithms such that it is able to run at a speed which is comparable to human sprinting. Hardware: Most of the hardware comes from MA Systems Ltd. UK (MA Systems). A little mechanical work has to be done at ETH as well. A novelty are the pneumatic actuators developed and produced by MA Systems. Using this new approach the hardware is much more lightweight than a purely electro mechanical robot. This concept enables us to aim at true running speeds which would be difficult and even dangerous with a heavy weight system. The first version of the robot hardware is called Monkey. Simulation: In order not to have to test every algorithm directly with Monkey, we use a physics simulation of the robot. Monkeys virtual equivalent is called SimBot. To control SimBot we implemented a scripting language. Posture based conditions can be used as feedback within the script. The Simulation is built using the ODE physics engine. Algorithms: For the learning algorithms we established a collaboration with the machine learning group of Prof. Joachim Buhmann. Currently we plan to implement Bagging and Boosting with some simple classifiers. In the end we may need a solution which combines conventional algorithms with machine learning. Clear training data is not available since we don't know yet how such a robot has to move in order to run properly. Still the fact if he falls and how fast he has ran provide a certain feedback. Therefore a reinforcment learning algorithm in the end may fit the bill. For clustering the sensor input or joint angles to a certain expression of posture unsupervised learning like k-means could be used. Technologies: The main computing will be conducted on an FPGA based multicore processor implemented by Liu Ling. The desgin used has originally been adapted by Prof. Niklaus Wirth based on work of Chuck Thacker. The processor will be programmed using the Oberon language. The pneumatic actuators are controlled by valves. For each joint of the robot body, a small 8051based PCB serves as an interface allowing to flex, extend, block or relax the joint. The PCB connects to the FPGA using a wirless link.
