Monitoring based Assessment of Offshore Wind Energy Converters For the online assessment of Offshore Wind Energy Converters classical and structural reliability methods as well as Bayesian networks are integrally applied. The project aims at condition information and decision support for inspection and maintenance planning. Megawatt class wind energy converters (WEC) in the offshore environment represent a great technical challenge concerning the design, construction and operation. It is planned to build large scale wind parks with a great number of identical structures. Inspection, maintenance and repair actions contribute largely to operation costs. Therefore monitoring and maintenance planning is essential for cost efficiency in order to keep wind energy production competitive. This background motivates the development of a monitoring and assessment system for sophisticated inspection, maintenance and repair planning. Therefore the German Federal Institute for Materials Research and Testing has initiated the research project IMO-WIND. Sensor technologies, data analysis and early damage detection procedures are developed in the IMO-WIND project delivering data for the assessment of offshore wind energy converters (OWECs). This work is aiming at the development of the scientific basis for the monitoring and assessment system to be applied for OWECs. The system will be based on structural reliability theory and Bayesian networks. The focus will be the development of a system for online assessment of OWECs supported by monitoring data. A risk analysis is performed to identify hazards, barriers and consequences for Offshore Wind Energy Converters (OWECs) resulting in the formulation of failure modes. Considering the respective consequences further work can be focused on critical failure modes. Moreover optimal sensor positions for monitoring of critical components connected to the respective failure modes can be identified. System reliability is calculated based on failure modes identified by risk analysis using probabilistic models for loads, material strengths and the structural deterioration processes. The determination of the system reliability requires additionally an estimation of the system model uncertainties as well as a correlation between variables in different failure functions. For the model uncertainties probabilistic models are established based on literature and a sensitivity analysis is performed. Measurement based condition parameters for structural components (e.g. tube connections, piles) are to be developed based on risk and reliability analysis. Furthermore different monitoring strategies using various sensor technologies are to be analysed. Direct integration of monitoring data and indirect integration, e.g. with an intermediate step using Finite Element simulations, are to be investigated. Monitoring data are to be integrated in the probabilistic model using Bayesian updating. Another aspect will be the analysis of combining monitoring with Non Destructive Evaluation strategies for inspections of OWECs. Methods applied in the offshore industry and for onshore wind energy converters are to be evaluated. Inspection results are to be integrated in the probabilistic model using Bayesian updating.
