Sliding mechanism in RC shear walls considering the interaction of bending and shear The research focuses on understanding the sliding response mechanism considering its interaction with the shear and flexure response of reinforced concrete structural walls, how it degrades under cyclic loading, and how to model it using the strut-and-tie and the finite element approaches. The 2010 Maule earthquake in Chile restarted the debate on the seismic performance of reinforce concrete shear walls. Building structures designed using reinforced concrete shear wall performed quite well in previous earthquakes, including the large 1985 and 1995 Chilean earthquakes. Subsequent small changes in the Chilean building code and design practice may have resulted in an unexpectedly large percentage of relatively new buildings that suffered significant damage during the 2010 Maule earthquake. The new questions center on the interaction between bending and shear resistance with the focus on sliding mechanisms in reinforced concrete shear walls. The composite flexural response of a reinforced concrete wall, characterized by the reinforcement carrying the tension and the concrete carrying the compression stresses, starts after the initial cracking. Simultaneously, a number of mechanisms develop to transfer the shear loads across the crack. This is accomplished through an interaction of mechanisms of aggregate interlock, sliding friction and dowel action of reinforcement. Two primary consequences of flexural damage affect the shear strength. One is the permanent elongation of reinforcement that occurs during repeated cyclic loading because of the inability to close the cracks that opened in previous loading cycles. This phenomenon reduces the aggregate interlock and eliminates friction as the shear-carrying mechanism. The other is damage in concrete under compression. This phenomenon includes spalling of the concrete cover and micro-structural damage of concrete. Furthermore, the capability of this shear resistance mechanism decreases with each subsequent cycle. Finally, after substantial loss of shear strength occurs, the dominant response mode of a reinforced concrete wall becomes one of sliding across the formed shear cracks. The research focuses on understanding the sliding mechanism considering the interaction between the shear, flexure response and, on understanding the degradation of the shear resistance mechanism with repeated cyclic flexure, and on development of mechanical models of these phenomena.
