Statistical process control and information management in pharmaceutical production In this project, a methodology will be developed for rational decision making about continuous improvement efforts in pharmaceutical production, focusing on data mining, process scheduling and efficient information management. The goal of this project is to develop a methodology based on production data and their statistical evaluation by decomposing the production process into sub-processes. With these evaluations, the scope of sub-processes that are reviewed can be narrowed down to a small number of production steps, and therefore, improvement efforts are focused on the decisive parts of production and their effect is increased. The production facility providing the case studies for the thesis is PKau (F.Hoffmann-La Roche), which fills prefilled syringes as well as liquid vials and freeze-dried vials that are used to fill syringes. As they are injected into the blood stream, these products have to be completely sterile and free of substances that trigger fever, i.e. pyrogenes. The filling of these products is performed in a chain of several hundreds of value-adding steps, which are segmented into a smaller number of sub-processes that are performed by assigned departments. The chain of sub-processes begins with receiving the materials, goes on with the compounding of the product solution and comes to the filling department. From there it is handed over to the visual inspection section and is tested in parallel for microbiological contamination before batch documents are presented to the quality assurance managers. Parameters that indicate the performance of such a facility include: - average production duration (total lead time) - variability of production duration - filling accuracy - waste - yield of product The methodology is developed in the pharmaceutical industry; however it has to be extendable to a broader range of applications, like batch-wise production facilities in the process industry.
