The Oxfordian - a major turning point in Mesozoic paleoceanography The Late Jurassic remains one of the enigmatic times in climate and ocean history when high pCO2 concentrations seemed to coincide with a cool climate. It was also a time of accelerated fragmentation of Pangea resulting in a reorganisation of climate and oceanography. Some of these changes culminated in the Oxfordian as reflected in the Sr-isotope record, with lowest Mesozoic Sr 87/86 values measured in Oxfordian sediments and in the bifurcation of the Pacific and Atlantic Nd-isotope record. Oxygen isotope values suggest that the Early Oxfordian and the Late Callovian were an exceptionally cool time in the Jurassic. The Oxfordian was also the time of transition to pelagic carbonate sedimentation with calcareous nannoplankton as a new major calciSmodern ¸ T um carbonate sink in pelagic environments. In this project we plan to find answers to the following questions: a) Did changes in the Tethyan marine carbonate carbon and organic carbon system coincide with a reorganisation of physical oceanography? Methods used: Bio- and Chemostratigraphy, sedimentology, Nd/Sr-isotope data. b) Did these changes coincide with changes in the global carbon cycle and with changes in climate? Methods used: C-isotope stratigraphy, sedimentology. c) Did the changes from organic-carbon rich sediments to carbonates in the northern Tethyan Oxfordian coincide with the replacement of radiolarian cherts by radiolarian limestones in the southern Tethys? Methods used: Bio- and Chemostratigraphy, sedimentology. d) What conditions favoured the formation of iron-rich, microbial and in places Fe-oolitic condensed beds? Methods used: Sedimentology, isotope geochemistry (O, Nd, Sr), microprobe analyses. e) Are the earlier identified C-isotope spikes regionally limited or do they record a perturbation of the global carbon cycle? Methods used: high-resolution Corg and Ccarb-isotope stratigraphy f) Are albite mineralisations of Oxfordian micrites related to hydrothermal fluid movement along the northern Tethyan margin (Helvetic nappes, Nissibach, Walensee)? Methods used: Microprobe, isotope geochemistry g) Is there any evidence for changing paleo-pCO2 conditions during the transition from a presumably cold early Oxfordian to a warm middle Oxfordian. Methods used: Carb and Corg (bulk and biomarker) isotope data. The time frame available is given by biostratigraphies. The establishment of a new carbon isotope stratigraphy is needed. Sections investigated are located in the Jura Mountains, Vocontian Trough, Helvetic nappes, Préalpes, Southern Alps and Atlantic (ODP).
