Characterizing spatio-temporal variability and sources of N2O from a Swiss Grassland This projects aims to characterize spatio-temporal variability and sources of N2O.The project integrates various measuring techniques,incl. eddy covariance flux measurements,chamber flux measurements,routine soil moisture and mineral N analyses,and isotope measurements of N2O via QCL spectrometer. T ¸ Description (including references to the titles of the attached graphics) This project addresses some of the methodological challenges and advances associated with quantifying and understanding emissions of nitrous oxide (N2O) from soil. N2O is a potent greenhouse gas and ozone depleting substance, with agricultural soils as its dominant anthropogenic source. N2O emissions from soil are mediated through abiotic and microbial transformations of one of the most limiting nutrients to plant growth, i.e., nitrogen (N). Due to a multitude of processes underlying N2O emissions, each with a different set of controls, N2O emissions are typically very variable in time and space. Therefore, it is important to determine temporal fluctuations in space-integrated N2O emissions and its sources, while understanding the underlying spatial heterogeneity. Advances in laser absorption spectroscopy have made it possible to measure N2O concentrations nearly continuously. In combination with micrometeorological measurements and eddy covariance computation, it is now possible to determine soil to air N2O fluxes, integrated over the footprint of the flux tower, nearly continuously over time. While this method can greatly improve N2O budgets for a given field compared to conventional flux chamber techniques, some of the info on underlying spatial variability within the footprint is lost. Therefore, we are carrying out eddy covariance measurements in combination with flux chamber measurements along a transect within the tower footprint in the current study. The most recent advances in laser spectroscopy allow the determination of isotope values d15N, d18O and the intramolecular distribution of 15N within N2O (further referred to as site preference or SP). These values contain information about the source processes underlying N2O emissions (Yoshida and Toyoda, 2000; Decock and Six, 2013). The determination of isotope values of soil-emitted N2O at the flux tower level can provide information on sources of N2O integrated over the field site. Once again, this can be paired with isotope values of soil-emitted N2O from flux chambers, in order to better understand the underlying spatial heterogeneity. In addition, we are measuring soil moisture content, NH4+ concentrations and NO3concentrations along the transect throughout the field campaign. These soil variables are driving factors for processes underlying N2O emissions, and can help explain underlying source processes and some of the spatial and temporal variability observed in N2O fluxes. T ¸ Materials and methods The study was carried out in an intensively managed grassland at the ETH research station at Chamau, situated north of Lake Zug in the pre-alpine lowlands of Switzerland at 400m a.s.l. N, 8o24S38T E), with a mean annual temperature of 9.1oC and 1151 mm of precipita(47o12S37T tion. The grassland is used for forage production, and the grass mixture consists of two dominating species, i.e., Italian ryegrass (Lolium multiflorum Lam.) and white clover (Trifolium repens L.). Management typically includes 3 to 5 harvests followed by slurry application, depending on weather conditions and biomass growth. The field campaign covered 3 harvests and slurry applications between April 25 and September 5, 2013. The field site is equipped with an eddy covariance flux tower and a laser absorption spectrometer c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> for the determination of N2O concentrations with high temporal frequency (Mammarella et al., 2010). The eddy covariance measurements are managed by Dr. Lutz Merbold. An automated system also collected air samples from the flux tower for the measurement of isotope values of N2O via laser absorption spectrometry (Mohn et al., 2012). The isotope measurements at the flux tower were performed by Dr. Benjamin Wolff. Ten static flux chambers were installed along a transect following the main wind direction within the flux-towerSs footprint. N2O fluxes from the chambers were measured daily for 7 to 10 days after mowing and slurry application and once per week in between management events. For the determination of N2O fluxes, chambers were closed for 30 minutes, during which gas samples were collected at 0, 10, 20 and 30 minutes after closure. Gas chromatography was used to determine N2O concentrations in the gas samples. N2O fluxes were calculated based on the increase in N2O concentrations during chamber closure (Kennedy et al., 2013). For each date at which N2O fluxes from flux chambers were determined, we collected soil samples for the determination of gravimetric soil moisture content, and soil NH4+ and NO3concentrations. Soils were extracted with 1 M KCl (1:5) and NH4+ and NO3- concentrations were determined colorimetrically (Doane and Horwath, 2003; Forster, 1995). For a period of 12 days after the third slurry application, we collected additional 110 mL gas samples from the flux chambers after 40 minutes chamber closure for determination of d15N, d18O, and SP via isotope ratio mass spectrometry. The isotope values were measured at the Climate-Smart Agriculture Institute at the Johann Heinrich von Thünen Institute in Braunschweig, Germany. Additional soil samples were collected for determination of natural abundance 15N in NH4+ and NO3-, using the denitrification method for 15N-NO3-, and the denitrification method preceded by microdiffusion and persulfate digestion for 15N-NH4+ (Sigman et al., 2001; Lachouani et al., 2010). Processing is planned for winter/spring 2015. For this 12-day data subset, gross N mineralization rates, gross nitrification rates, gross N immobilization rates and sources of N2O will be constrained using a numerical isotope model following Decock and Six (2013a). T ¸ Equipment used Spectrophotometer, Vis V-1200, VWR International Gas Chromatograph equipped with electron capture detector, Agilent 6890, Agilent Technologies Inc., Santa Clara, USA Quantum Cascade Laser Absorption Spectrometer, EMPA, Switzerland Air pre-concentrator, EMPA, Switzerland N2O trace gas monitor, Aerodyne Research, USA Isoprime 100 TraceGas Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer, Isoprime, UK. T ¸ Preliminary results (with references to graphics that are uploaded in separate file) There was a reasonably good correlation between N2O fluxes obtained from flux chambers compared to the eddy covariance tower, however, differences between the methods in calculated fluxes appear on certain dates (Fig. 1). We are in the process of reanalysing both the flux chamber data as well as the eddy covariance data to identify potential underlying causes for these discrepancies. N2O peaks could generally be attributed to mowing, temperature and/or precipitation, but varied in duration and magnitude from peak to peak (Figs. 1 and 2). Clear increases in NH4+ and NO3concentrations appear after the second and third fertilization, while such effect is hardly significant following the first fertilization (Fig. 3). With exception of the brief spike in WFPS associated with heavy rain in the end of July, the soil moisture content, expressed as water-filled pore space (WFPS) was lower in July and August compared to April, May and June (Fig. 3). At first site, variability in duration and magnitude of N2O emission peaks cannot be readily explained by temporal changes in soil NH4+, NO3-, DOC or WFPS. Further data analyses will be carried out to better understand the mechanisms underlying the observed temporal variability in N2O emissions. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> As the position of the flux chambers as well as the sampling strategy for soil parameters was oriented along a transect following the footprint of the eddy covariance tower, spatial variability in N2O fluxes and controlling factors within the footprint can be evaluated. There was a clear depression in the footprint around position 6, 7 and 8, where waterlogging was commonly observed, especially in periods of high rainfall. Effects of this microtopography are clearly reflected in the mean WFPS, DOC and NO3- concentrations observed during the measurement period, and to a lesser extend in the NH4+ concentrations (Fig. 4). Surprisingly, higher NO3- concentrations were observed in the depression compared to other positions along the transect, even though one would assume that long periods of waterlogging would repress nitrification in this lower-lying location. Furthermore, despite the clear effect of the microtypology on various factors that are known to control N2O emissions, no such effect of chamber position on N2O emissions and harvested biomass was observed (Fig. 5). As for the temporal variability, more advanced data-analysis will be explored to further uncover the mechanisms controlling spatial variability in N2O emissions in our study. For isotope values of NO3- (15N) as well as N2O (15N, 18O and SP), there is a clear pattern associated with the sharp increase in NO3- concentrations and N2O emissions following the third fertilization (Fig. 6). The sharp decrease in 15N-NO3- in the first few days following fertilization could be attributed to a rapid production and mixing of 15N depleted NO3- in the original NO3pool, followed by isotopic enrichment associated with consumption of NO3-. The relatively constant 18O-NO3- might be attributed to exchange of O between NO3- and H2O (Kool et al., 2007). Immediately following fertilization, isotope values of N2O are lower compared to those of atmospheric N2O, reinforcing the notion that soil derived N2O is depleted in 15N and SP compared to the atmospheric average. The drop in isotope values of N2O following fertilization could imply a decrease in N2O reduction to N2 or a shift in nitrification versus denitrification as source of N2O. Data for 15N in NH4+ is underway, and will in combination with isotope modeling help elucidate the likelihood of these different scenarios. T ¸ Discussion We plan to write a manuscript discussing factors underlying temporal and spatial variability in N2O emissions in the Chamau grassland, based on measurements of soil properties and N2O fluxes during the entire measurement campaign, as well as process-level information derived from isotope data collected following the last fertilization event. A first draft of the manuscript is expected by fall 2015. At this point, data-analysis is too preliminary to derive anticipated conclusions. Dr. Benjamin Wolff took a lead on a manuscript entitled SFirst ¸ on-line isotopic characterizati on of N2O emitted from intensively managed grasslandT, currently under peer-review. The paper demonstrates the feasibility of using quantum cascade laser absorption spectroscopy to measure isotope values of soil emitted N2O in the boundary layer (2 meter above the soil surface). From an ecological point of view, we illustrate the insights that high-temporal-resolution isotopic data in combination with information on the ancillary variables NH4+, NO3- and DOC can provide with respect to variations in mechanisms underlying N2O emissions throughout the growing season. T ¸ Relevant literature Decock, C., Six, J., 2013. How reliable is the intramolecular distribution of 15N in N2O to source partition N2O emitted from soil? Soil Biology and Biochemistry 65, 114-127. Doane, T.A., Horwath, W.R., 2003. Spectrophotometric determination of nitrate with a single reagent. Analytical Letters 36, 2713-2722. Forster, J.C., 1995. Soil nitrogen. In: Alef, K., Nannipieri, P. (Eds.), Methods in Applied Soil Mi crobiology and Biochemistry. Academic Press, San Diego, pp. 79U87. Kennedy, T., Decock, C., Six, J., 2013. Assessing drivers of N2O production in California tomato c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 4> cropping systems. Science of The Total Environment 465, 36U47. Kool, D.M., Wrage, N., Oenema, O., Dolfing, J., Van Groenigen, J.W., 2007. Oxygen exchange between (de)nitrification intermediates and H2O and its implications for source determination of NO3- and N2O: a review. Rapid Communications in Mass Spectrometry 21, 3569-3578. Lachouani, P., Frank, A., Wanek, W., 2010. A suite of sensitive chemical methods to determine the d15N of ammonium, nitrate and total dissolved N in soil extracts. Rapid Communications in Mass Spectrometry 24, 3615U3623. Mammarella, I., Werle, P., Pihlatie, M., Eugster, W., Haapanala, S., Kiese, R., Markkanen, T., Rannik, Ü., Vesala, T., 2010. A case study of eddy covariance flux of N 2 O measured within forest ecosystems: quality control and flux error analysis. Biogeosciences 7, 427-440. Mohn, J., Tuzson, B., Manninen, A., Yoshida, N., Toyoda, S., Brand, W.A., Emmenegger, L., 2012. Site selective real-time measurements of atmospheric N2O isotopomers by laser spectroscopy. Atmospheric Measurement Techniques 5, 1601-1609. Sigman, D., Casciotti, K., Andreani, M., Barford, C., Galanter, M., Bohlke, J., 2001. A bacterial method for the nitrogen isotopic analysis of nitrate in seawater and freshwater. Anal. Chem 73, 4145-4153. Yoshida, N., Toyoda, S., 2000. Constraining the atmospheric N2O budget from intramolecular site preference in N2O isotopomers. Science 405, 330-334.
