Civil Society ­ Government Interactions in Global Governance The project investigates how civil society groups ­ both NGOs and business groups ­ and government representatives interact in international environmental policy-making. This project focuses on how civil society groups (NGOs and business groups) and government representatives interact in the context of global environmental policy making. We select this policy area because multi-level governance approaches are prevalent and NGO activity is very extensive (on average). Our interest lies in understanding the patterns of interaction between government and NGO representatives. Whereas some scholars argue that global civil society activity undermines the authority of states, others emphasize the continuing hegemony of the nation-state. Consequently, the relationship between states and civil society groups is often depicted as inherently oppositional, even zero-sum in nature in that an increase in power and importance by non-governmental actors must necessarily come at the expense of state power. Yet national governments are linked to the societies within which civil society groups flourish and it is possible that benefits may accrue to both parties when they cooperate in international fora. So far very few attempts have been made to theoretically analyze the government ­ civil society relationship. In this project we argue that a) the relationship between national governments and civil society groups may be supplementary; and b) there may be an enormous potential for future cooperation. On the one hand, we posit that the patterns of interaction among national governments and civil society groups that result in mutually agreed upon agendas increase the probability that nonstate actors interests are served in international fora because government collaboration supplements the power capabilities of those groups, and helps them overcome the procedural constraints set by individual regulatory institutions. In addition, inclusion of these groups in national delegations can enhance their legitimacy, since governments are accountable for explicitly including them or their positions in decision-making processes. On the other hand, we claim that national governments can also gain from the activities of environmental NGOs within formal international political processes, since NGOs provide policy advice, help monitor commitments and delegations, and minimize ratification risk. In addition, NGO participation at these international decision-making fora facilitates signaling between governments and constituents, which might help national governments to convince domestic constituencies that they should not be blamed for an unsatisfactory agreement or policy gridlock, and consequently NGO involvement enhances government accountability and legitimacy. Our theoretical framework proposes that the power capabilities (e.g. resources and expertise) of civil society groups, the political salience of the environmental issue at hand for national governments, as well as the domestic institutional setting (extent of democracy) determine civil society agentsS ability to participate and exert influence at the global level. Our research will concentrate on developing a formal model of civil society - government interaction that generates several testable hypotheses regarding the behavior of both civil society groups and governments, and when civil society groups should be successful in affecting policies at international fora. To test the hypotheses generated from the formal model, we use case study analysis. The empirical research will rely on a combination of available data and new survey research. As to the latter, through archival research as well as interviews with government, NGO, and business repre- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> sentatives at several Conferences of the Parties (COPs) of global environmental regimes, it could be possible to determine both actors' beliefs about the outcome of their interactions, and it also would be possible to examine whether civil society groups accomplish their goal. The project is undertaken in the context of the NCCR Democracy (http://www.nccr-democracy.uzh.ch/)
