Structural Monitoring of an Innovative Construction using FBG-Strain Sensors and a Polynomial Chaos Expansion Approach The aim of this study is to present the outcomes of a structural health monitoring campaign for a novel structure, namely the newly built elephant shelter at the Zurich Zoo. The structure comprises a complex geometry featuring a wooden free form cupola spanning an impressive 80 m. The aim of this study is to present the outcomes of a structural health monitoring campaign for a novel structure, namely the newly built elephant shelter at the Zurich Zoo. The structure comprises a complex geometry featuring a wooden free form cupola spanning 80 m, which is supported by a post-tensioned concrete ring. In collaboration with the engineers, various features have been monitored during different construction stages in order to validate and further refine the design model of the structure. A major component of this deployment relies on the use of FBG strain sensors that have been embedded into critical locations of the concrete ring, attached to the steel reinforcement, and which serve the purpose of long-term monitoring of the strain evolution within the post-tensioned concrete sections. Complementary to the data acquisition process, a structural identification framework has been developed for condition assessment and possible damage detection. The framework relies on the statistical coupling of measured strains with recordings of the acting environmental conditions in the form of temperature and humidity. The delivered performance index, tied to the structureSs operational condition, aims to facilitate the planning of regular inspection and additionally offers a warning/alarm trigger in case of damage due to an extreme event. A Polynomial Chaos Expansion (PCE) model is the computational tool employed to this end. Results indicate that the proposed framework is successful in tracking the structureSs operational response based on the variation of the environmental conditions.
