Instabilities in alpine Permafrost: Characterisation, Monitoring and Modelling of Active Rock Glaciers This research project focuses on the geotechnical response of alpine Permafrost, such as creep and failure behaviour, in a warming thermal regime. The research programme includes three main phases, namely field characterisation, monitoring and modelling of a rock glacier in Turtmanntal (CH). Global climate change has a major influence on the sensitive cryogenic regions of the Alps. Increasing mean temperature, accompanied by extreme weather conditions such as heavy rainfall events, may initiate landslides and instabilities in the coming decades due to accelerated motion of the ground. Various forms of hazard to human life and infrastructure may be a consequence. Examples of this phenomenon include the catastrophic 1997 debris flow at Val Pola and rapid motion of entire rock glaciers in Turtmanntal (CH). The correlation between natural hazards, thermohydrological and mechanical processes and are poorly understood. Therefore the seasonal effects of temperature cycles on deformation within the rock glaciers and mechanical behaviour of warm alpine permafrost, i.e. at temperatures close to 0 rC, need to be investigated in order to gain better understanding of rock glacier dynamics and stability of permafrost slopes in cold regions. A rock glacier on Furggwanghorn, located in the Turtmanntal (Valais, CH) was chosen as a site for field characterisation and long term monitoring. The rock glacier shows clear signs of thermal degradation and high velocity and creep-down slope movement. The research programme includes three main phases, namely characterisation, monitoring and modelling of this rock glacier, which will be conducted by three research groups in geotechnics, geophysics and hydromechanics. Several measuring instruments have been installed to observe the behaviour of this area following preliminary characterisation of the ground using surface geophysical methods (seismic, georadar, NMR and geoelectric). Several boreholes were drilled in order to install thermistor chains and in-place inclinometers. Unlike a normal inclinometer, the in-place inclinometer allows the data to be received during the whole year, even when the surface is covered by a thick snow layer and therefore inaccessible. The measurements taken within the rock glacier are supplemented by a meteorological station, which collects long-term measurements of air temperature, precipitation, humidity, wind direction/speed, snow depth and radiation. The data from the meteorological station is important for the interpretation of the measurements taken inside the boreholes. The data collected will be used for a thermo-hydro-mechanical (THM) analysis, after calibrating a constitutive model with results from c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> laboratory tests on material removed from the field. In parallel, collaboration with the University of Zurich (Dr. I. Gärtner Roer) for geodetic measurements and photogrammetric analysis of surface movements and newly instituted LIDAR and radar interferometry measurements are delivering exciting insights into surface movements on the Furggwanghorn rock glacier.
