Ermüdungsverhalten von kreuzweise bewehrten Stahlbetonplatten | Fatigue Performance of Orthogonally Reinforced Concrete Slabs The fatigue behaviour of reinforced concrete slabs will be investigated in a series of fatigue tests. The progression of the fatigue damage mechanism will be monitored with emphasis on the detection of individual reinforcing bar fractures by non-destructive testing methods. The majority of concrete bridges in Switzerland was constructed prior to the introduction of explicit guidelines concerning fatigue of reinforced concrete to the Swiss design standard. Furthermore, the remaining service life of a large number of existing concrete structures in Switzerland and internationally may be jeopardised by the increasing frequency and axle load of heavy vehicles. Previously, the fatigue behaviour of short frame bridges was investigated in large-scale cyclic tests. Analysis of the results indicated that fatigue action represents a relevant hazard scenario for existing reinforced concrete bridges. The fatigue damage mechanism, primarily affecting the reinforcing steel, was characterised as a continuous process which accumulates over thousands of load cycles and exhibits a highly non-linear behaviour. It has been shown that the deck slabs of reinforced concrete bridges are susceptible to fatigue damage due to a small ratio of own weight to traffic loads and light reinforcement content. The progression of the fatigue damage process in these elements, however, still remains largely unknown. The primary objective of the current project is to investigate the fatigue performance of orthogonally reinforced concrete slabs under cyclic loading. The influence of a deviation of the principal moment from the reinforcement direction will be investigated with regards to the fatigue strength. Slab strip specimens will be subjected to constant-range cyclic loading until fatigue failure of individual reinforcing bars is observed. Parameters, such as the deflection, crack width and reinforcing steel strain range, will be monitored to characterise the structural behaviour. The collaboration with on-going investigations of non-destructive testing methods, such as the magnetic flux leakage method, could enable the detection and localisation of reinforcing bar fractures.
