Uncertainty quantification in computational hydraulics This project aims at introducing and developing uncertainty quantification in computational hydraulics engineering. Methods to handle the analysis of high-dimensionality, highly non-linear model responses will be investigated within the in-house developed software UQLab. Uncertainty is ubiquitous in natural phenomena, as well as in the design and analysis of engineering structures and systems. Advanced methods for representing the sources of uncertainty and propagating them through computational models are necessary for designing safe and robust structures under safety and cost constraints. In this context, metamodelling techniques like polynomial chaos (PC) expansions have emerged as powerful tools for propagating the parameter uncertainties through the computational models and solve typical questions of safety ("what is the probability of failure of the system?") and sensitivity analysis ("what are the important parameters that drive the system behavior?"). Such techniques can be effectively applied to the field of computational hydraulics, which is based on the numerical solution of partial differential equation of different mathematical nature and complexity. In this field taking into account uncertain physical phenomena (such as routing of flood events, dam breach processes, morphological processes in river beds, etc.) can be computationally highly demanding, easily resulting in excessive computational loads. The application of advanced methods for uncertainty quantification can effectively reduce the computational effort of such simulations. Uncertainty quantification is a field of engineering that deals with the development and deployment of effective techniques for the quantification of uncertainty in natural and engineered systems. It has a strong focus on reducing the computational costs traditionally associated to the inherently stochastic nature of uncertainty. It is possible to cast any uncertainty quantification problem in terms of a general theoretical framework comprising three steps: i) the definition of a physical model of reality, ii) the identification and representation of the associated sources of uncertainty and iii) the propagation of such uncertainties to the quantities of interest through the computational model. Numerous techniques exist to efficiently carry out such tasks, including advanced techniques for the representation of stochastic dependency between input variables (copula theory), adaptive sparse metamodelling techniques to approximate complex and time-consuming computational models, and parsimonious analysis techniques to identify failure probabilities (reliability), as well as to rank sources of uncertainty according to their effects on the uncertainty of the quantities of interest (sensitivity). The aforementioned techniques can be effectively employed to reduce the computational costs associated with computational hydraulics applied to risk analysis. Metamodelling techniques (e.g., polynomial chaos expansions) can be used to approximate complex flood propagation models (e.g., the in-house developed BASEMENT software, a simulation environment for computation of environmental flow and natural hazard simulation), enabling advanced Monte-Carlo techniques to estimate the risks associated with flood events in populated areas. Bayesian inference can be applied to the task of analyzing and quantifying sources of uncertainty quantification, traditionally implicitly included in empirical safety factors , e.g. in dam engineering. Finally, reliability and sensitivity analysis techniques can be applied to estimate the risks associated to exceptional floo- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> ding events (e.g., dam breaches) for the resident population. The in-house developed UQLAB software will be adopted as the development platform for the uncertainty quantification part of the project, taking advantage of the HPC facilities available at ETH Zurich.
