Customized Hybrid Powertrains Derive a methodology to find the optimal hybrid electric vehicle for a specific driving cycle, including the topographic profile and availability of electric power for recharging the battery at certain points of the trip. Hybrid-electric vehicles (HEV) will play an important role in the mobility of the next twenty years. They combine the excellent efficiency of electrical power-trains with the advantages of liquid or gaseous fuel combustion engines, i.e. easy and fast refueling, excellent travelling range. For historical reasons the components which build a hybrid powertrain are chosen with a focus on availability and not with a previous optimization. This results in suboptimal configurations which cannot exploit the possible potential. To fully exploit the potential of the electric hybridization of powertrains and thus achieving the lowest possible fuel-consumption, the following points will be investigated in the project: Optimal Control: Find the optimal control strategy for a given configuration and demand. The configuration includes the chosen hybrid topology as well as the characteristics of the components. The components can undergo considerable changes during operation. Especially the ageing of the battery is an important issue. It may be advantageous to include the battery state of health (SOH) into the control strategy. The demand is characterized by the speed profile as well as the altitude profile. Further influencing factors can be the driver, possible recharging stations along the track and others. The optimization for different demands can be done based on prior knowledge which is often available in large fleets or as an online optimization if little is known in advance. Optimal Configuration: Find the optimal hybrid configuration and the optimal components for a given demand. TodaySs vehicles are used for very different purposes, which leads to different demands. Obviously the optimal configuration will not be same in any case. If prior knowledge is available, the configuration can be optimized for that specific demand. The hybridization does lead to a change in the requirement profile of the internal combustion engine. The present design may no longer be optimal in a hybrid configuration. ICE improvement: Hybrid electric vehicles are used to save fuel and to reduce pollutant emissions. Inefficient partload operating points of the internal combustion engine are either replaced by the electric motor or they are shifted to more efficient regions (higher loads) using the excess power to charge the battery. Furthermore, breaking maneuvers are used to recharge the battery. If the degree of hybridization (ratio of electric power to total power) is chosen large enough, the full potential of fuel reduction can be exploited for a given configuration and the engine can be operated almost at optimal efficiency. This means, that for further fuel reduction, the maximum efficiency of the internal combustion engine has to be improved. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2>
