New Developments in Ion Beam Physics (2000201 37532) Analytic ion beam technologies in Accelerator Mass Spectrometry (AMS) and Materials Sciences (MS) are prgressed. Research is focused in three major directions: A. Developments of new instrumentation beyond AMS B. Low Energy AMS of Actinides C. Capillary ion microprobe. The growing demand of analytic ion beam technologies in both major research fields of the ETH Laboratory of Ion Beam Physics (LIP), Accelerator Mass Spectrometry (AMS) and Materials Sciences (MS) has encouraged us to apply for a new grant following up our initial research project started in 2008. Our intention to exploit synergies with ion beam technologies turned out to be exceptionally successful and our accomplishments have triggered follow up research activities, which will strengthen our leading role in the strong international competition in this field. We will focus again on the investigation of basic processes involved in ion beam physics to further improve measurement technology, generate new directions for the experimental procedures, and thus open up new application fields. The proposal is structured into the three main topics: A. Developments of new instrumentation beyond AMS: Here, our primary objective will be the development of a radiocarbon dating system without using an accelerator as it is implemented in all existing AMS systems. Basic studies of charge exchange and molecule dissociation processes and proof-ofUprinciple experiments will be conducted. Specific design studies for a mass spectrometer for radiocarbon dating and experiments to evaluate the best-suited configuration of such a system are planned. B. Low Energy AMS of Actinides: With the upgrade of the ETH Tandy AMS system impressive progress of low energy AMS of actinides (1.2 MeV of beam energy) has been demonstrated. We will exploit the new opportunities to optimize measurement procedures, to enhance overall detection and transmission efficiencies, and to reduce background levels. Systematic studies of properties of He as stripper gas will be conducted and the implications to the measurement procedures will be investigated. With the perspective to efficiently determine 236U/238U ratios down to the 10-12 level, the full range of applications for anthropogenic and natural occurring 236U in environmental samples becomes available. In addition, the potential for new measurement and application opportunities of other actinides will be evaluated. C. Capillary ion microprobe: In contrast to conventional MeV ion microprobes where large, highly sophisticated and expensive magnetic lens systems are applied, we are investigating the use of tapered capillaries to collimate and focus ion beams to sub-micron spot size. In the past two years we were able to implement a simple prototype of such a device as a proof of concept. A further improvement of this instrument necessitates a more thorough investigation of the physical processes leading to phase space compression of the transmitted ion beam. In addition, we propose several approaches to significantly enhance the device performance and to explore the application potential of this novel type of microprobe.
