Entwicklung eines Modulators für ein Klystron in der 50 MW HF-Klasse Pulse-Genesis: 120MW/370kV Solid State Modulator In medical applications for cancer treatment and also in linear accelerators used e.g. at PSI/CERN, voltage pulses with amplitudes of several 100kVs and pulse lengths in the ¸ ts-range are required for accelerating particles. In the past, such high voltage pulses usually have been generated with Pulse-Forming Lines (PFL) or Pulse-Forming Networks (PFN). The main disadvantages of the PFLs/PFNs are the relatively short live time of the switches, the size of components due to the high voltage, the fixed pulse width and the missing capability to turn off during fault conditions. With the increasing power handling capability of semiconductors, the PFLs/PFNs mostly will be replaced by solid-state modulators that are usually based on modern IGBT-technology and pulse transformers. The solid-state modulators offer a very compact design with high reliability, adjustable pulse length, high repetition rate and turn-off capability in case of faults. During this research project, concepts for a 120 MW pulse power solid-state modulator with a pulse voltage of 370kV required in the new Swiss Free Electron Laser (SwissFEL) at PSI are investigated. Since only the flat pulse top could be utilized for precise acceleration, the rise time for the output voltage has to be below 1¸ ts, i.e. the dv/dt at the output is > 500kV/¸ ts and the overshoot must be smaller than 3% in order to maximize the system efficiency. A major challenge is the very high accuracy (<10^-5) of the pulse parameters, which is one key element for generating very Sclean ¸ T X-rays at PSI. The system will be separated in a charging unit with PFC and DC-DC converter, a pulse generator and a transformer to adapt the input voltage of 3kV to the targeted output voltage of 370kV. With the DC-DC converter the storage capacitors must be charged within a short time of less than a millisecond with an accuracy of better than 10^-5. This requires fundamental new concepts as also a continuous power consumption of the mains is required. In order to verify the outstanding accuracy of the pulse modulator, also new ultra-accurate and wide bandwidth measurement concepts are investigated during the project.
