Resilience of electric power supply network under natural hazards This project investigates the resilience of the electric power grid infrastructure exposed to natural hazard by investigation the vulnerability and recoverability of its principal components: the transmission systems, the substations (switches and the transformers), and the power generation stations This project focuses on investigating the resiliency of the electric power grid infrastructure exposed to natural disasters from the perspective of its principal components. The principal components of the network are: the transmission towers, the transmission cables, the connections between the cables and the towers (attachments and insulators), the switches, and the transformers. The research goals are: 1) to establish a method to evaluate the resiliency of a geographically distributed power grid infrastructure system; 2) to develop new component improvement techniques aimed at reducing the risk exposure of the power grid infrastructure system; and 3) to develop the tools to evaluate the risk reduction and cost effectiveness of proposed retrofit techniques. In order to achieve these objectives, the following research is carried out: 1. The fragility of each of the network components in natural disasters such as tornados, ice storms, landslides, avalanches, earthquakes and fire, will be established and quantified; 2. The Bayesian Network analysis (BN analysis) approach will then be employed to model sample power grid networks and establish the sensitivity of the gridSs ability to function to the parameters of the particular component fragility functions and the parameters of the particular natural hazard. Therefore, the critical components in a system and most-probable hazard scenarios will be identified; 3. According to the research findings obtained in Task 2, it is expected that resiliency of existing power grid system can be increased by adopting effective measures to improve the performance of the critical components within the grid; 4. After identifying the elements of the electric power grid system (Task 2) and the types of improvement that will have potentially the highest benefits (Task 3), the objective of this task is to engineer, prototype, test, and propose a design procedure for the deployment of such improvements into the existing power grid infrastructure. The process for deploying these improvements will involve structural design for a variety of hazards, building test specimens, conducting quasi-static and hybrid simulations to determine the mechanical characteristics of the specimens, developing an computer model of these grid elements, and conducting element and system-level simulations to validate that the proposed improvements indeed work.
