Quantum coherent atomic gases We study (quantum) phase transitions and properties of novel phases of quantum condensed atomic gases using techniques of condensed matter physics. Cooling atoms to the nano-Kelvin regime allows for the realization and study of new thermodynamic phase transitions and their associated phases, with an interesting synergy emerging between the fields of quantum atom optics and condensed matter physics. We have studied the instability towards the Mott insulator appearing in one-dimensional confined Bose gases, the appearance of a supersolid phase in two-dimensional mixed Fermion-Boson systems, the instability towards phase separation, the implementation of a ring-exchange term with quantum optical means leading to a lattice gauge theory, and the dynamic properties of the BoseHubbard model in the vicinity of the Mott-insulator to superfluid phase transition, where we have determined the excitations over a mean-field groundstate within a truncated Hilbert space, particlehole modes in the Mott insulator and sound (Goldstone) and gapped (Higgs) modes in the strongly correlated superfluid. We have analyzed the evolution of the excitations across the MI-superfluid transition and have verified the existence of the gapped mode down to the weakly interacting Gross Pitaevskii regime using a quantum rotor model analyzed within a time dependent variational technique. Furthermore, we have studied the mesoscopic aspects of (energy/heat) transport through a MI-superfluid interface. The determination of the system response to various external drives allows for the experimental verification of our results. Recently, we have performed a similar study (phase diagram with localized and superfluid phases and associated excitations) on the Jaynes-Cummings Hubbard Model describing photons in weakly coupled cavities and interacting repulsively through the presence of two-level systems (qubits) in each cavity. Besides standard strong coupling perturbation theory (RPA type plus quantum corrections) we have made use of the slave boson technique. In a system of reduced complexity, a dimer cavity system realizable in a circuit QED setup, we have demonstrated a nonequilibrium delocalization-localization transition of photons. Other recent work deals with the dynamically generated double occupancy as a tool to characterize the Mott phase in a Fermi-Hubbard system. In our study of competing lattice orders in a dipolar (long-range) interacting gas subject to a (square) optical potential (substrate potential) we find the lowest energy states at fixed particle density, a (distorted and rotated) triangular phase at low substrate potential and a square lattice at high substrate potential; on reducing the substrate potential, the square lattice undergoes a shear instability to a period doubled phase, which then joins the distorted triangular phase via a second order commensurate-incommensurate transition and a solitonic intermediate phase.
