Scattering at Complex Screens We study the definition and properties of boundary integral equations for acoustic and electromagnetic scattering problems at screens with junctions, their boundary element Galerkin discretization and preconditioning. Patch antennas and sound panels are two specimens of thin structures interacting with waves, electromag- netic or acoustic. Their approximate description as two-dimensional surfaces is widely employed, along with assuming perfectly absorbing or reflecting properties, which yields what is usually called a screen. Boundary element methods (BEM) offer a popular approach for numerically simulating the scattering of waves at screens. Their analysis and that of the underlying boundary integral equations (BIE) has matured in the case of simple screens that are Lipschitz manifolds with boundaries, but it is still in its infancy for more complex arrangements involving panels with junctions. This project aims to achieve understanding of analytical properties of BIEs and Galerkin boundary element discretizations for complex screens of this kind. We intend to establish a framework in terms of suitable function spaces for the variational formulation of BIEs for both acoustic and electromagnetic scattering at complex screens. For simple screens the unknowns are jumps of traces of scattered fields, but for complex screens a meaningful notion of a jump is elusive at junctions. Therefore, we aim for a more abstract view of the function spaces in terms of factor spaces of two-sided traces modulo unique traces. This will apply to both acoustic and electromagnetic screen problems. For the latter, however, it will be important to esta blish Hodge-type decompositions of these abstract Sjump ¸ spacesT. The functional framework will be the basis for the numerical analysis of convergence of low-order Intuitively, in particular in the elecGalerkin boundary element methods in the Sjump ¸ spacesT. tromagnetic case, the approximating functions have to satisfy current conservation constraints at junctions in order to guarantee uniqueness of solutions. Yet, it may be wise to ignore the constraints completely and deal with the resulting singular but consistent linear systems directly. The analysis of the discretized electromagnetic screen prob- lem will also entail the development of discrete Hodge-type decompositions in boundary (edge) element spaces. Two further issues to be addressed in the project are (i) how to apply operator preconditioning to discrete screen problems, and (ii) the use of adaptive mesh refinement controlled by a posteriori error indicators for the resolution of strong singularities of the solution that will emerge at edges of the screen. All theses investigations will be accompanied by implementation based on the C++ boundary element library BETL.
