Methods and tools that support a fast and efficient FastETO U engineer-to-order process (ETO) for parameterized product families The development of the first product and process configurators goes back to the 80s. The full potential, however, was achieved later on in the 90s by integrating the parameterization also into CAD and CAM software. Background: The development of the first product and process configurators goes back to the 80s. The full potential, however, was achieved later on in the 90s by integrating the parameterization also into CAD and CAM software. This made it possible to show the customer the final product already in the bidding phase and to rapidly program the CNC machines. Many companies that maintain this technology as one of their core competencies see configured products, although they might have diverse characteris-tics, as standard products being produced in a so called MTO process (make or Scustomized describe products, that cannot be completely to-order). The terms Snonstandard ¸ T ¸ T configured and manual workarounds are needed. In general, such companies try to configure as far as possible and use an ETO process (engineer-to-order) to finalize the constructions. Motivation: In the recent past, growing global competition has increased the requirements on ETO processes. both time and costs U Today, the customer is no longer willing to pay an additional premium U for technical and administrative preparations in sales, construction and production planning when producing ETO products only slightly differing from configurable products. This is especially the case for simple machines and equipment. Although the premium is still paid for complex products as for example entire plants, it is getting smaller. Thus, a reconsideration of existing ETO processes is necessary. Objectives: The aim of a joint project between ETH and industry is to make the ETO process for parameterized product families faster and more efficient. This requires the consideration of a large number of organizational and technical challenges. Issues as design of ETO processes related to product, pro especially in global organizations cess, quotation or order structures, knowledge management U U as well as the selection of appropriate IT tools are addressed in this project. The establishment of organizational requirements and the development of technical tools should support participating companies to improve their competitiveness in todaySs global market
