Cell free biocatalysis using cofactor dependent oxygenases in aqueous / organic reaction media. Today, biocatalysis is a well recognized technique in organic synthesis in academia and for some industrial processes. It represents a promising strategy in support of green chemistry . This is due to the mild reaction conditions and to the often high chemo-, regio-, and stereospecificity of enzyme based reactions. In this respect, biocatalysis is used in reactions which are difficult if not impossible to perform with traditional chemical technology. One example is the specific functionalization of nonprotected and nonactivated carbon atoms in hydrocarbons, such as the specific epoxidation of olefins by microbial oxygenases. This class of reactions has considerable industrial significance as epoxides are valuable and reactive synthons in organic synthesis. The overall goal of the proposed project is the development of organic synthesis reactions based on isolated cofactor dependent oxygenases in aqueous / organic reaction media. This includes obtaining a fundamental understanding of enzyme stability under process conditions, the development of simple protein preparation procedures and a stable biotransformation process with integrated down stream processing on pilot scale. In order to achieve these goals, styrene monooxygenase (SMO), a two component flavin monooxygenase, will be used as model enzyme. This enzyme was previously cloned, overexpressed and preliminarily characterized in our laboratory. SMO catalyzes the epoxidation of non activated aryl substituted vinyl groups in an enantiospecific manner. SMO has a broad substrate spectrum with the most prominent reaction being the formation of (1S, 2R) Indene oxide from Indene with an ee value of 98.4% and a high specific activity. (1S, 2R) indene oxide is the key intermediate in the preparation of Crixivan (Merck), a very potent inhibitor of HIV protease used in the treatment of AIDS. Development of a cell free emulsion process for soluble, multicomponent oxygenases like SMO including enzymatic cofactor regeneration will result in a new and industrially highly interesting technology allowing the large scale application of these enzymes as off the shelf chemicals without the need to handle growing microbial cells. In order to develop general principles, this work will be based on detailed characterization of enzyme stability under process conditions, interactions of oxygenases with organic solvents and sustainability of the function of the whole system on pilot scale.
