Structure of Multiphase Frozen Foodstuffs under Mechanical Energy Input at Low Temperatures In preliminary work it could be shown that a specific volumetric energy input within a certain range could influence the particle size distribution of water and fat crystals in a positive way so that smaller crystals resulted. This effect is strongly linked to an establishment of an energy balance between the mechanical energy input and the energy discharged from the system by cooling. The aim of this work is to develop fundamental knowledge of process units for low temperature mechanical treatment and related off- and on-line analytics to get information about the structure of the pre-crystallised or crystallised food systems. Foods of interest are ice cream (priority) and margarine, or other fat spreads. The process development is carried out in the laboratory and pilot plant scale. On-line measurement techniques are developed and adapted (NIR rheometry, conductometry) to these processes to receive relevant process data (temperature, pressure, volumetric flow, power consumption, etc.) as well as data describing the state of the final product (viscosity, particle size distribution, particle shape, crystal modification, density, temperature, enthalpy, etc.). The important part is then to combine structural information with the process data. On this basis a process control concept is developed. Concerning the analysis of frozen structures, suitable techniques are developed. In order to describe shapes of ice crystals and foam bubbles and determine their size distributions (ice crystals and foam bubbles), a special preparation technique and scanning electron microscopy can be used. For more rapid detection of particle size distributions of ice crystals, a special light microscopy technique combined with computer imaging equipment has been introduced. To measure the amount of existing crystals in the pre-crystallised state, special DSC (differential scanning calorimetry) techniques were developed. Another off-line technique to describe the texture of the crystallised final product is based on dynamic solids analysing methods. To measure the scoopability of ice cream, an ice scooper with an integrated force sensor is used and the results are compared with sensory tests.
