Coupling various processes to groundwater models The project is part of the EU project Groundwater and dependent ecosystems: New scientific and technical basis insight and technical basis for assessing climate change and land-use impact on groundwater systems , Grant no. 226536 GENESIS CP-IP. It concentrates on coupling various processes. Groundwater resources are facing increasing pressure from consumptive uses (irrigation, water supply, industry) and contamination by diffuse loading (e.g. agriculture) and point sources (e.g. industry). This causes major threats and risks to our most valuable water resource and on ecosystems dependent on groundwater. New information is needed on how to better protect groundwaters and groundwater dependent ecosystems from intensive land use and climate change. The impacts of land use changes and climate changes are difficult to separate as they partly result in similar changes in the ecosystems affected. The effects are highly inverwoven and complex. The EU groundwater directive GWD and the water framework directive WFD provide means to protect aquifers against pollution and deterioration. At present, the maximum limits for groundwater pollu- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> tant concentrations have been set for nitrate and various pesticides. Also, water of sufficient quality and quantity should be provided to ecosystems dependent on groundwater. The European aquifers differ by their geology, climate, and threats to aquifers. This must be considerecd when general guidelines for management of these systems are developed. The concept of the present project is to base the research on different relevant aquifer sites in various European countries to test scientific issues and find new results to important problems. Teh overall project (GENESIS) contains 7 work packages. WP1 Case studies on implacts and threats to groundwaters and groundwater dependent ecosystems. WP2 Groundwater dynamics, recharge and water balance, WP3 Leaching to aquifers under different land uses, WP4 Groundwater dependent ecosystems: Groundwater - surface water interaction, WP5 Modelling processes in groundwater systems, WP6 Concepts, scenarios, and risk assessment, WP7 Coordination. The project part at IfU contributes mainly to workpackage 5.
