Occupational Health - Causative Factors of Musculoskeletal Disorders Employees and workers frequently suffer from musculoskeletal pain, and musculoskeletal disorders are a main cause for early retirement and work incapacity. In agreement with results from other research groups we have shown that work-load (heavy lifting, constrained postures, repetitive tasks), inadequate workplace dimensions and organizational stress are important causing factors. To optimize the method of prevention, the scientific knowledge on pathophysiological mechanisms must be further enhanced. Prevention strategies (ergonomic improvements, load limits, education) should be scientific evaluated in regard to their health-outcome, effects on productivity and cost-efficiency. Actual research deals with work-related pain of the neck and upper extremity, carpal tunnel syndrome and low back pain. Motor Co-Activation: Fast repetitive movements have been identified as risk factors for workrelated muscle pain. It is hypothesized that co-contraction of antagonistic muscles and constantly increased muscle tensions are main causes for work-related musculoskeletal neck-, arm- and hand - disorders in data entry tasks. We studied tapping task using three-dimensional measurements of movements and electromyography (EMG). At a subjectively comfortable keying-rate, co-contraction and muscle tension significantly increased. Measurements with patients are planned. Motor Unit Activity: It is hypothesized, that in tasks that involve a muscular stabilization of the shoulder (e.g. typing) certain motor units are constantly active and cellular metabolism is overloaded. By intra-muscular EMG we analyse the activity of single motor units of the trapeze muscle in relation to work demands (precision, concentration, speed). At present, monitoring time of the activity of single motor units is restricted to less than an minute. Use of wire electrodes and new decompostion procedures (applying wavelet analysis) shall increase the monitoring time to one hour. Nerve Compression: In the hand, weakness and pain often are symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome, which is caused by compression of the median nerve at the wrist. Its occurence is linked to repetitive and forceful hand movements. A telefone survey among a random sample of the population of the canton of Zurich yielded significantly higher rates in females compared to males. In bathroom tilers the prevalence of cases were significantly higher and some occupational risk factors could be identified. Spinal Compression: Comparing cases and controls we recently showed that, before the beginning of symptoms, employees with low back pain worked significantly more often in professions that are characterised by high spinal compression forces, akward postures or heavy lifting. Intervention: By a randomized controlled trial we proved that a medical training program significantly reduces the level of low back troubles in hospital employees. We are partners of a European research team that evaluates the reliability of measures of low back disorders. In various companies, case studies are undertaken to examine the efficacy of ergonomic and interactive interventions.
