UQLab: the uncertainty quantification toolbox in Matlab UQLab is a Matlab platform dedicated to uncertainty quantification in engineering sciences. It provides state-of-the-art algorithms for uncertainty propagation (Monte Carlo simulation, polynomial chaos expansions, Kriging, sensitivity analysis(Sobol' indices) to be used with any computational model. Uncertainty quantification is an emerging field at the boundary of computer simulation-based engineering on the one hand, applied mathematics, statistics and probability theory on the other hand. This general formulation covers a vast field of approaches including, among others: - structural reliability analysis, which aims at computing the probability of failure of a structure (or, more generally, of a system) w.r.t a given performance function and the probabilistic description of uncertain parameters; - sensitivity analysis, which aims at determining the input parameters of a computational model whose uncertainty explains at best the systemSs performance variability; - reliability-based design optimization, which aims at optimization systems under reliability cons acceptable U probability traints (e.g. minimize the systemSs mass/cost while ensuring a minimal U of failure); - Bayesian techniques for calibration and validating computer models w.r.t experiments. In terms of research, contributions to this broad topic equally come from the engineering, statistics and applied mathematics communities, sometimes with their own vocabulary. In terms of computational tools, few tools are available (e.g. [1] for reliability analysis) and none covers the broad scope mentioned above. The UQLab project aims at developing a Matlab-based architecture that allows one to use uncertainty quantification algorithms in a distributed high-performance computing environment. The platform is designed as a central module providing low-level services in probabilistic modelling and parallel computing, onto which plug-in modules can be easily added. The foreseen modules include revisited algorithms for reliability analysis à la FERUM [1], meta-modelling techniques (polynomial chaos expansions, Kriging [2], support vector machines [3]), sensitivity analysis (SobolS indices), Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods, etc. The platform will be used for different applications in uncertainty quantification and risk analysis in the fields of civil and mechanical engineering. When the project is mature it is intended to disseminate it at a larger scale by moving to an open-source development framework. Bourinet, J.-M., Mattrand, C. & Dubourg, V. A review of recent features and improvements added to the FERUM software, Proc. 10th~ Int. Conf. Struct. Safety and Reliability (ICOSSAR'2009), Furuta, H.; Frangopol, D. & Shinozuka, M. (Eds.), Osaka, Japan, 2009. Lophaven SN, Nielsen HB, Søndergaard J. DACE, a Matlab Kriging toolbox, Technical report, Technical University of Danemark. Gunn, S.R. Support Vector Machines for Classification and Regression. Technical Report, Image Speech and Intelligent Systems Research Group, University of Southampton, 1997. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2>
