Indo-Swiss Cassava Network The project aims at developing RNA-based strategies and other non transgenic strategies to introgress resistance against geminiviruses and their insect vector (whitefly) in cassava, one of the most important starch crop in Southern India. Cassava is one of the major sources of carbohydrates in Southern India. The most important constraint to cassava production in Southern India is cassava mosaic disease (CMD). CMD is caused by geminiviruses which are plant DNA viruses transmitted by whiteflies in a persistent manner. Despite the identification of sources of CMD tolerance and resistance in cassava germplasm, their introgression in farmer- and industry-preferred cultivars remains difficult and limited due to the high heterozygosity, the long selection cycle and, in some cases, the absence of rapid and robust screening methods. In this context, biotechnological approaches have emerged as potent tools to circumvent the limitations inherent to cassava breeding. In the last decade, RNA-based biotechnological approaches have been successfully implemented in crop plants to engineer robust resistance to plant viruses and insects. This project aims at: 1) developing reliable protocols for genetic transformation of farmer- and industry-preferred cassava cultivars from India (in particular Southern India); 2) testing RNAbased approaches to engineer robust resistances to whiteflies as well as cassava geminiviruses present in Southern India and previously identified in the ISCB project between Basel University and Madurai Kamaraj University (MKU) (Genetic diversity and RNAi-based control of cassava mosaic geminiviruses in India, project CV 1.2); 3) developing reliable screening methods for virus and whitefly resistance evaluation in confined environment; 4) generate transgenic cassava resistant to cassava geminiviruses and whiteflies; 5) performing field trials of the transgenic cassava lines generated during this collaborative effort between ETH Zurich, CTCRI, MKU and University of Basel. The multiple components of the biotechnology research proposal will be used as a framework for technology transfer and capacity building between Switzerland and India. Innovative RNA and peptide-based strategies will be instrumental to combine robust CMD resistance with resistance to whiteflies.
