Engineering durable resistance to viral diseases in cassava for sustainable industrial production in Southern Africa The purpose of the IDP-ESR2 project is to test sustainable strategies for virus resistance in cassava used for starch production in South Africa. Purpose The purpose of the IDP-ESR2 is to test sustainable strategies for virus resistance in cassava used for starch production in South Africa. Collaboration The IDP-BRIDGES ESR2 is joint collaboration between ETH Zurich and University of the Witwatersrand (Johannesburg, South Africa). Use of cassava accessions for the project In the project IDP-BRIDGES ESR2 we intend to use the model cassava cultivar 60444 as well as the T200 industry-preferred cultivar. The model cultivar is not cultivated in Africa due to its high susceptibility to bacterial and viral diseases. It is used in laboratories worldwide for proof-ofconcept research. The T200 industry-preferred cultivar has high starch content and is cultivated on a few large commercial farms for starch production in South Africa. The use of T200 is covered by an agreement between University of the Witwatersrand, Casquip Starch Manufacturing PTY Ltd and the Technological Innovation Agency (State agency, South Africa). Production of transgenic cassava Both ETH Zurich and University of the Witwatersrand are intensively collaborating to implement technologies in cassava. Dr Hervé Vanderschuren (ETH Zurich, cassava research group leader) has transferred genetic engineering technologies to University of the Witwatersrand and helped establishing a genetic transformation platform for T200 industry-preferred cassava (Chetty et al., 2013). Transgenic cassava will be collaboratively generated and the best performing transgenic cassava lines will be included in a field trial application jointly submitted by University of the Witwatersrand and ETH Zurich. Field trial application will comply with biosafety law in South Africa. South Africa has ratified the Carthagena Protocol on Biosafety.
