Development of On-line Micro Sensors for Rheological and Structural Properties of Foods To describe structure property relationships dependent from the processing conditions, complex physical or chemical parameters have to be quantified. The aim is to improve consumer quality (sensorial behaviour, convenience, safety), processability (technical and economical process optimisation) and to reduce or avoid environmental loads. From the engineering point of view on-line measuring techniques for structureor structure- correlated parameters are preferred. The main problem is the adaption of the measuring cells to the process without initiating the measure of artifacts. In many cases the food structure and related parameters are mechanically changed in on-line measuring cells during the measurement (e.g. by mechanical stresses in bypass pumps or stresses induced by the transducer.). Then the measured sample is not representative and consequently the parameters measured are not suitable for process control. The development of microsensors which could be used in food processes without disturbing influence to the process and measurement, is of major interest for the food industry. Sensor principles which can directly measure quality parameters (e.g. structure, rheological properties) should be preferred. Another advantage of micro sensors, the combination of different measuring sensors on one chip, allows to compensate easily e.g. pressure- and or temperature influences on the measured complex structure parameters (resp. rheological parameters).In many cases structural or rheological parameters which are correlated to the quality properties of the final product should be measured in the process step to be controlled. For process- or product optimisation the functional relationships between these parameters measured in the process and the final product quality parameters have to be known. In the first project steps preference is given to the development of micro sensors for the detection of structure and rheological parameters, because mechanical and thermal process control can influence these parameters significantly, and most of the final product quality aspects (e.g. sensorial consistency, separation stability) are correlated. The preferred food microsensors are: a.) Rheometric sensor for viscous- and viscoelastic fluids b.) ltrasonic sensor for structure analysis (especially disperse structures) c.) nfrared sensor (NIR / scanning) for structure analysis (macromolecular, disperse-, structure- and phase changes and chemical changes) In co-operation with the Institute for Physical Electronics (ETH - Zürich) the microsensors will be designed and prototypes produ- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> ced using standard industrial CMOS technology, including on-chip circuitry for calibration and compensation as well as for real-time signal conditioning.
