Urban travelogue-12 days in Palestine The project examines the urban dynamics in the West Bank as a consequence of political conflict, looking at past and present conditions. The resulting book and short films will focus on the concept of Palestinian identity and how it ties to the transformation of the urban environment. Abstract The project examines the urban dynamics prevalent in the occupied Palestinian territories in the West Bank as a consequence of the political conflict between Israel and Palestine, looking at conditions from 1948 until the present day. The resulting book and short films will focus on the concept of Palestinian identity and how it ties to the transformation of the urban environment. Using a variety of media (written text, photographs, video and audio recordings), the project investigates and documents its subject matter with historical analysis, critical mapping, interviews with various actors and the researchersS personal field notes. The content has been collected from a 12-day investigative field trip and supported by independent research and source material from relevant authors. The projectSs hybrid methodology aims to foster an advanced form of urban literacy and novel urban design strategies in a diverse range of global environments. Relevance PalestineSs recent admission into UNESCO and its controversial application for full membership to the United Nations has reshaped the conversation surrounding the Palestinian conflict. Renewed international attention has coalesced around the embodied issues of identity and heritage along with land tenure and building practice as a political means of land occupation and urban development. The project investigates the history of origin-stories and identity transformations as shaped by urban contexts in a selection of displaced Palestinians communities. Through a set of pre-defined issues, the publication attempts to document the changes in the Palestinian national ethos as reflected by displaced West Bank inhabitants and refugees in neighbouring countries. The publication offers educational value as a prototype for an inclusive investigative and reporting method. By combining field research techniques into a compendium shaped by a theoretical framework, it offers a unique and contemporary document for a broader reading public. The publication applicable to a diverse scope of critical urban case documents a scalable investigative method U studies. Media Structure Media documentation in the form of audio and video podcasts will be accessible on a companion website as complimentary story-telling platform to the printed book. Such interactivity will add a deepening dimension to the subjects and analysis presented of the book. Thus, the research with its hybrid investigation methodology will uncover a unique and personal reflection on the complex history and contemporary issues affecting the lives of Palestinians in arthe West Bank. It offers a reading of the urban environment through three different lenses U chitecture and urbanism, architecture and politics, and urban sociology. These three readings are intertwined with a fourth voice in the form of open quotes from a diverse selection of interviewees. These perspectives shape the content with practical and material considerations and reveal the legal, physical and psychological constraints effecting the daily lives and changes in the Palestinian urban environments. ´ The combination of SobjectiveS tools of knowledge in the form of maps, photographic documenta- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> tion and legislation reviews are tempered by the investigation into their human consequences. This angle is generally missing in the information offered by contemporary media channels in which the personal link between action and legislation is often obscure and remote. A preview of such multimedia enrichment can be seen in the short vignette below, produced for the projectSs introductory lecture as part of the U-TT ChairSs Urban Stories speaking series.
