Charging effects and spectroscopy of C60 films The charging properties of C60 films in FET devices are studied taking Stark effect and steps into account. The photoemission spectra of chemically doped C60 films are analyzed including the strong coupling to intra-molecule and dopant phonons. We study the charge profile of a C60-FET (field effect transistor) as used in the experiments of Schön, Kloc and Batlogg. Using a tight-binding model, we calculate the charge profile treating the Coulomb interaction in a mean-field approximation. The charge profile behaves similarly to the case of a continuous space-charge layer, in particular it is confined to a ~ electron (or hole) per C60 molecule. The morahesingle interface layer for doping higher than 0.3 dral disorder of the C$_$molecules smoothens the structure in the density of states. We investigate the possibility of doping C60 crystals by applying a strong electric field. For an accurate description of a C60 field-effect device we introduce a multipole expansion of the field, the response of the C60 molecules, and the Stark splitting of the molecular levels. The relevant response coefficients and splittings are calculated ab initio for several high symmetry orientations. Using a group theoretic analysis we extend these results to arbitrary orientations of the C60 molecules with respect to the external field. We find that, surprisingly, for the highest occupied (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO), respectively, the two leading multipole components lift the degeneracy of the molecular level in the same way. Moreover the relative signs of the splittings turn out to be such that the splittings add up when the external field induces charge into the respective level. That means that when charge carriers are put into a level, its electronic structure is strongly modified. Therefore, in general, in C60 field-effect devices charge is not simply put into otherwise unchanged bands, so already because of this their physics should be quite different from that of the alkali-doped fullerenes. The charge doped into a semiconductor in a field effect transistor (FET) is generally confined to the interface of the semiconductor. A planar step at the interface causes a potential drop due to the strong electric field of the FET, which in turn is screened by the doped carriers. We analyze the dipolar electronic structure of a single step in the Thomas-Fermi approximation and find that the transmission coefficient through the step is exponentially suppressed by the electric field and the induced carrier density as well as by the step height. In addition, the field enhancement at the step edge can facilitate the electric breakthrough of the insulating layer. We suggest that these two effects may lead to severe problems when engineering FET devices with very high doping. On the other hand steps can give rise to interesting physics in superconducting FETs by forming weak links and potentially creating atomic size Josephson junctions. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2>
