Variable stiffness wing structures with compliance for aeroelastic morphing This project investigates the implementation of variable stiffness buckling components embedded in compliant wing structures to achieve aeroelastically aided morphing. Such compliant structures offer great potential in terms of actuation and complexity reduction for morphing applications. Currently, morphing is achieved basically using either a topological or variable stiffness approach. The former method aims at introducing a selective complaint system which allows the structure to achieve desired shape variations. The latter employs components capable of stiffness variation, allowing the morphing structure to alter its compliance in preferred directions resulting in geometrical modifications. The implementation of variable stiffness elements embedded in compliant systems of wing structures allows for achieving conflicting structural requirements, namely sufficient rigidity to withstand prescribed loads, while maintaining compliance in desired deformation modes. Exploiting the anisotropy achievable with variable stiffness components provides compliant systems with enhanced directional flexibility and stiffness characteristics, crucial for realising morphing. The aim of this project is to couple the advantages of variable stiffness components with topological synthesis of purely elastic structures to achieve superior morphing capabilities. In this investigation variable stiffness is achieved by designing simple structural elements within selective compliant structures capable of buckling in a preferred direction when a prescribed level of load is reached. The nature of the employed variable stiffness components offers the possibility to use the energy of the flow to induce desired shape variation. Hence, aerodynamic surfaces can be designed to attain optimal shapes depending on the different load cases of the flying envelope. This results in wing morphing been achieved with reduced actuation requirements or, for certain missions, altogether passively. Furthermore, the purely elastic nature of the herein proposed variable stiffness components is entirely compatible with the employed selective compliance systems resulting in no additional complexity.
