Occupational Health - Development of a Screening Method for Neurobehavioral Effects from WorkplaceExposures Occupational exposure to chemicals may impair the central nervous system. Decreased efficiency, increased accidents and potential health hazards are the undesirable consequences. At modern workplaces employees often are simultaneously exposed to many chemicals. Interactions must be expected and susceptibilities may vary among exposed persons. Methods are needed to already detect undesired effects at subclinical levels. Such a test-battery must be sensitive, easy to administer and may not be too time-consuming. Existing neuropsychological test-batteries are time-consuming and not sensitive enough. We are developing a more sensitive computerized screening tool that may be used in occupational medicine for regular tests of exposed workers. It is based on the following sensory and central nervous functions: (a) Balance behavior can be rapidly measured and we have shown that it is a sensitive measure in slight alcohol intoxication; (b) simultaneous attention to several tasks has been shown to be sensitive for after-effects from sleeping-tablets, a computerized version that is easy to administer shall be developed; (c ) tracking tasks for the evaluation of fine motor movements are a further topic; (d) at the institute (M. Menozzi) computerized tests to measure contrast sensitivity and changes in color vision have been developed for screening purposes of visual functions and shall be tested for their sensitivity to detect effects from chemical exposures. An exposure chamber is in construction and we will start with experiments on low level solvent exposures in healthy subjects. The developed new tests will be compared with results from standard tests (e.g. Wiener Determinationsgerät ). Clinical studies with patients are planned to validate the developed testprocedures. Furthermore the new methods are used in case-studies at work-places of Swiss companies. The neurobehavioural tests are correlated with the results from exposure measurements and personal monitoring at work.
