Influence of Mechanical and Thermal Energy Input in the Conching Process on the Structuraland RheologicalProperties of Chocolates The Conching process is a batchwise long time (8-10 hours) intensive mixing/dispersing unit operation in chocolate manufacturing with superimposed heat treatment. This process mainly influences the development of the chocolate flow properties and structure as well as its flavour. It is qualitatively known that the mechanical treatment leads to a dispersion of the sugar and cocoa particles in the continuous cocoa butter phase. A high degree of energy dissipation by Coulomb friction between the particles of the chocolate system, which has wet powder-like structure at the beginning of the conching process, and additional heating lead to an evaporation of water(2-5%). Acetic acid and some aldehydes are distilled with the water. This is of importance for the flavour development. On the other hand, the discharge of water influences the rheological and structural development. It is known that the dispersion of solid particle agglomerates may increase the interparticular structural interactions and thereby lead to an increase in viscosity of a suspension system. On the other hand an improved coating of the chocolate particles with the fat phase will improve the flow behaviour. Added emulsifiers (lecithin) will as well contribute to a viscosity reduction, but mechanical stresses can as well destroy this emulsifier property. This leads to the basic question of the quantitative description of the relationship between the mechanical (and thermal) energy and power input and the chocolate suspension structure and its rheology. In the conching apparatus there is a very complex distribution of local mechanical and thermal energy input and residence time in different zones. The aim of the project is to quantify the relationships between shear and normal stresses acting on the powder/suspension particles, residence time and temperature, under well defined mechanical and thermal conditions to be realised in a model shear conching device. Numerical simulations for partial zones of a conching system will help to describe the local mechanical and thermal conditions. This information will then be combined with the material behaviour information under defined conditions which is investigated in the shear conching system. The aim for application is to reduce the processing time compared to the conventional process and develop fundamental criteria for improved apparatus design and process optimisation. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2>
