TOPOgraph In the TOPOgraph project our objective is to automatically map urban areas using high-resolution remote sensing data. We propose to formalize complex priors about the structure of urban environments in a probabilistic fashion, by means of a Conditional Random Field with higher order potentials. In the TOPOgraph project our objective is to automatically map urban areas using high-resolution remote sensing data. It is generally accepted that in order to overcome weak or missing evidence in semantic image interpretation, the key issue is to introduce the rich prior knowledge about the scene into the model. We propose to formalize complex priors about the structure of urban environments in a probabilistic fashion, by means of a Conditional Random Field (CRF). A crucial unsolved problem in CRF modeling is how to take into account object-level context and topology. The proposed research shall formalize this high-level knowledge through likelihoods derived from graph matching. We view automatic mapping as multi-class classification, where the aim is to find class labels for all pixels such that the posterior probability of the labeling is maximized. The parameters of the classification function shall be found automatically, by solving an optimization problem on a large dataset of labeled training data containing remote sensing images and maps. Maps represented in vector format enable learning complex large-scale topologies with reasonable computational cost. After training, new remote sensing imagery can be classified automatically by CRF inference. On the one hand, the standard machinery of CRF learning and inference is employed to learn the local appearance of objects. On the other hand, large-scale topologies are learned from maps via higher order potentials, extending probabilistic learning and inference to large scale object characteristics like streets are connected networks . A novel energy function based on higher order potentials shall be designed, which directly integrates topological patterns of arbitrary size and complexity into Random Field models. Although our target application is remote sensing, the proposed methodological developments are generic and will benefit any image interpretation tasks involving highly structured scenes, such as medical image analysis or building facade reconstruction.
