Quantitative determination of silicate melt speciation usign Raman and NMR spectroscopy on rapidly quenched samples The aim is to construct a tool with which the type and abundance of structural entities (species) in two- and three-component silicate melts can be determined quantitatively and to constrain the effect of temperature and composition on the speciation by combining of Raman spectroscopy and NMR. Magmas are a mixture of solid mineral phases and a silica-rich melt phase that controls most of its bulk physical properties. This melt has a complex and highly variable composition, but the constituent atoms are arranged in a limited number of well-defined clusters or species . The type and the relative abundance of the species, i.e., the speciation , change as a function of composition and temperature. From experiments, we know that the physical properties (e.g., the viscosity) and thermodynamic properties (e.g., the heat content) of bulk melts directly depend on speciation and the properties of the species themselves. Thus, information on the species is essential for the understanding of magmatic processes, such as volcanic system, or the formation of economically important metal concentrations in the Earth's crust. So far, a quantification of species properties has been limited by the lack of measurement of their relative abundance in melts.The aim of this study is (I) to construct a tool with which the type and abundance of species in two- and three-component silicate melts can be determined quantitatively and (II) to sufficiently constrain the effect of temperature and composition on the speciation to allow quantification of physicochemical properties of individual species. The approach will build on previous studies that combine Raman spectroscopy and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR), two of the most successful techniques in the identification of silicate melt species. Raman spectroscopy is a time and cost efficient method to determine the type of species present in melts or glasses (i.e., frozen melts), but the method is not quantitative. NMR is a quantitative tool but its application is time consuming and technically difficult in melts at high temperatures. The key idea of this study is to use a rapid quenching device to freeze melts to glasses before their structure and the speciation can re-adjust to lower temperatures, thus preserving the high temperature configuration. The temperature at which the sample is quenched will be determined by comparing Raman spectra obtained in these glasses with those obtained in actual melts at high temperatures. As the speciation (and the resulting Raman spectrum) changes with temperature, the quench temperature will be the temperature at which the melt and the glass have the same spectra. Combination of Raman and NMR data on these glasses will permit a calibration of the Raman signal intensities as a function of the abundance of the species at various temperatures and allow the use of the Raman probe as a quantitative technique for in situ measurements of the speciation of silicate melts. With this tool, we will generate the data necessary for the quantification of thermodynamic properties of individual species in a number of chemically simple melts and rationalize the relationship between the speciation and bulk physical properties. This speciation model will be an alternative to binary mixing models for the description of chemically simple systems such as those investigated in the ceramics research. This data will also be a key to quantify properties of chemically complex natural melts. Such information is essential to understand the dynamic evolution of magmatic systems leading to catastrophic eruptions or to the formation of magmatic (-hydrothermal) ore deposit.This study should be conducted within a Ph.D. thesis over three years and requires the construction of a quenching device, of a heating stage (to conduct Raman studies in melts) and acquisition of some laboratory equipment. Analytical tools are accessible at the ETH.
