Molecular Recognition in Chemistry and Biology Multi-dimens. approach to understand molecular recognition in chemistry and biology. Includes: complexation stud. with proteins and synthetic receptors, data base mining in Cambridge Structural Database (CSD) and Protein Data Bank (PDB), comput. stud. (collab.), protein & small molecule crystallogr. We apply a multi-dimensional approach to the understanding of molecular recognition phenomena in chemistry and biology. This approach involves a large number of collaborations and includes: - complexation studies with proteins - complexation studies with synthetic receptors - data base mining both in the Cambridge Structural Database (CSD) and the Protein Data Bank (PDB) - computational studies (in collaboration) - protein and small-molecule crystallography (in collaboration) These investigations are complemented by the results of gas-phase studies in the literature, that provide energetics of intermolecular interactions in the absence of solvent. Basically, once we have observed an interesting new intermolecular contact in crystal structures of proteins with small non-peptidic ligands, (see the presentation of our medicinal chemistry program), we perform a statistical analysis using the CSD and PDB to see whether this contact is of a more general nature. If this is the case, we put all efforts in quantifying the thermodynamics of the intermolecular contact through: - structure-activity relationships involving the targeted protein and a series of designed ligands, - preparation of synthetic receptors and host-guest binding titrations (e.g. a Rebek imide receptor for quantifying cation-? interactions involving adenine), - double-mutant studies with molecular torsional balances in the case of weak contacts, such as the multipolar interactions (e.g. CUF...C=O, or C=O...C=O). Our molecular recognition studies focus on the following intermolecular interactions: - pi-stacking and edge-to-face interactions on H-bonding arrays. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> - sulfur-aromatic interactions - cation-pi interactions - multipolar interactions, in particular orthogonal ones that are ubiquitous in protein-ligand complexes - halogen bonding.
