Predicting regional crop production in response to climate extremes Using the DAYCENT model, the research project aims to predict how climate change/extremes likely affect crop production and soil greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions  at the regional scale, considering a range of biophysical constraints in Switzerland, under conventional and alternative mgmt adaptation.
T ¸ Description A changing climate in the mean, variability, and/or shape of probability distributions can result in extreme climatic events. IPCC (2012) defines a climate extreme as Sthe ¸ occurrence of a value of a weather or climate variable above or below a threshold value near the upper or lower ends of the As an integral part of climate change, extreme climate range of observed values of the variable.T events have been observed in Europe over the last decades. For a range of emission scenarios, global climate models (GCMs) predict that the frequency and duration of temperature extremes and heavy precipitation events are likely to continue toward the end of the 21st century. Climate change is expected to develop regionally different climate constraints to agricultural crop production, hence leading to a major spatial land-use change. Warming is generally expected to create a more favorable environment for crop production and may allow new crops to be grown in central and northern Europe, while it may have negative effects on agriculture in lower latitude regions of Europe due to possible increases in pest/weed pressures, water shortage, and nutrient leaching. Unlike positive, negative, or no effect of mean climate change across different regions, climate extremes increase the vulnerability of agriculture and make its adaptation to climate change nontrivial. The increase in probability of drought occurrence has been related to recent crop yield loss with higher yield variability. Increased flooding and heavy precipitation can reduce crop production by excessive soil-water. The fertilization effect of elevated CO2 is, however, expected to offset yield declines caused by climate change, although its full potential may be overestimated and remains in debate. Moreover, crop growth and development exhibit specific threshold responses to each climatic factor. Our understanding of crop responses and feedbacks to climate change is still lacking. Consequently, the dynamics of plant-soil interactions are complex and highly uncertain but they are important in regulating GHG emissions from agricultural soils. The research project has been performed to determine the effects of climate extremes on crop production and GHG emissions from Swiss soils at the regional scale, considering a range of biophysical constraints and typical management practices. In 2014, the data from literature review and long-term experiments on crop growth and development have been compiled and a biogeochemical model (DAYCENT) was calibrated for selected crops using these data. In 2015, the model will be validated and then employed to determine regional crop production, soil carbon sequestration, and direct and indirect changes in GHG emissions under current climate conditions and in response to climate change and elevated CO2. Based on expert opinion, possible changes in extreme climatic events, and their uncertainties, will be considered in the simulations. The expected outcomes can help evaluate the potential adaptation of crops to climate change and extremes with alternative management practices. T ¸ Materials and methods Description of the DAYCENT model: DAYCENT is described in detail by Parton et al. (1998). c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> Briefly, it simulates major ecosystem processes that affect plant growth and development, such as soil organic matter, water flow, biogeochemical cycles (of C, N, S, and P), and soil temperature and water on a daily time step. Potential crop production is limited by soil temperature as each crop is regulated by its specific temperature response function. Germination/beginning of growing season is a function of soil temperature and harvest/end of growing season is a function of accumulated growing degree days. The availability of soil-water and nutrients from the soil or fertilizer is also a major factor that affects both crop production and the fraction of C allocated to roots. In addition, the model is able to specify the effects of elevated CO2 on net primary production, transpiration rate, and C:N ratio for biomass. Specifically, the model uses a logarithmic relationship of net primary production and transpiration rate with changes in CO2 between 350 ppm and 700 ppm, and a linear relationship of C:N ratio for biomass. A methanogenesis sub-model has been developed and recently incorporated to the model (Cheng et al., 2013). Data compilation: To establish model databases (i.e., land use, soil, and climate) specific for Swiss cropping systems, the data have been obtained from published literature and long-term experiments with an emphasis in aboveground and belowground production, the contents of biomass C, N, and lignin, shoot:root ratio, and harvest index. Annual C input will be estimated by the harvest index and shoot:root ratio. The following crop information still appears to be lacking: changes in crop development as a function of temperature, number of degree days for major phenological stages, and crop response (e.g., rooting depth and root distribution) to nutrient and drought stresses, and soil N2O and CO2 flux data. The list of management options has been specified based on the long-term field trials, which differs by crop type/variety, tillage, fertilization, organic matter (e.g., manure) addition, harvest (with variable residue removal), drainage, irrigation, burning, and/or grazing intensity. Expert opinion (e.g., Agroscope and FiBL scientists) was also considered to collect details on typical management practices in Swiss cropping systems. The CORINE polygon data set published by the Swiss Federal Department of Statistics were used to determine the spatial distribution of land under crops and pastures, coupled with a simple probability approach to generate typical crop rotations through time. Daily weather station data from 1975 to 2013 were obtained from the Swiss Federal Office of Meteorology and Climatology MeteoSwiss. 27 extreme indices for temperature and precipitation (Klein Tank et al., 2009) have been evaluated and several agrometeorogical indices (e.g., freeze day) were selected to further identify extreme climatic events over time and to estimate the extent to which cropland was exposed to these climate extremes. Model calibration: The data from long-term experiments have been compiled and used for model parameterization to accurately simulate crop biomass production, soil C, and GHG fluxes. Spatial sensitivity analyses will be conducted with model results to assess which crops can be grown where, and what their nutrient and water requirements would be under different conditions. Validation and prediction (in 2015): Once calibrated, the model will be used to predict the effects of climate change, including climate extremes, on the selected crops. CO2 fertilization effects will be considered if sufficient information is available or assumed based on literature data. For this study, climate change predictions are available at 25 km resolution for A1B emission scenarios from 15 GCMs in Switzerland. Effects of conventional/integrated management practices will be simulated for the period 2000 to 2100, and the adaptation potential of alternative management practices to climate change will be evaluated. In Switzerland, alternative (e.g. organic) and conventional farming practices have been compared in long-term field trials, mainly focusing on soil fertility and biota. The use of farmyard manure and compost is a main component of organic farming. Other alternative practices, such as winter cover cropping, have also been evaluated in an organic farming context. Each of them has the potential to sequester soil carbon in European croplands (Freibauer et al., 2004; Smith, 2004). Reduced tillage in organic farming will not be considered due to low c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> yields and enhanced weed pressure (Mäder and Berner, 2012), and winter cover cropping under winter wheat also will not. Equipment used Not applicable Preliminary results (with references to graphics that are uploaded in separate file) Not applicable Discussion Not applicable Relevant literature Cheng, K., S.M. Ogle, W.J. Parton and G. Pan. 2013. Predicting methanogenesis from rice paddies using the DAYCENT ecosystem model. Ecological Modelling 261-262: 19-31. De Gryze, S., J. Lee, S. Ogle, K. Paustian and J. Six. 2011. Assessing the potential for greenhouse gas mitigation in intensively managed annual cropping systems at the regional scale. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 144: 150-158. De Gryze, S., A. Wolf, S.R. Kaffka, J. Mitchell, D.E. Rolston, S.R. Temple, et al. 2010. Simulating greenhouse gas budgets of four California cropping systems under conventional and alternative management. Ecological applications : a publication of the Ecological Society of America 20: 1805-1819. Freibauer, A., M.D.A. Rounsevell, P. Smith and J. Verhagen. 2004. Carbon sequestration in the agricultural soils of Europe. Geoderma 122: 1-23. Frey, S.D., J. Lee, J.M. Melillo and J. Six. 2013. The temperature response of soil microbial efficiency and its feedback to climate. Nature Climate Change 3: 395-398. IPCC. 2012. Summary for Policymakers. In: Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation [Field, C.B., V. Barros, T.F. Stocker, D. Qin, D.J. Dokken, K.L. Ebi, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, G.-K. Plattner, S.K. Allen, M. Tignor, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. A Special Report of Working Groups I and II of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, and New York, NY, USA, pp. 3-21. Klein Tank, A. M. G., F. W. Zwiers, and X. Zhang. 2009. Guidelines on analysis of extremes in a changing climate in support of informed decisions for adaptation, Climate data and monitoring WCDMP-No. 72. Lee, J., S. De Gryze and J. Six. 2011. Effect of climate change on field crop production in California's Central Valley. Clim. Change 109: 335-353. Mäder, P. and A. Berner. 2012. Development of reduced tillage systems in organic farming in Europe. Renew. Agr. Food Syst. 27: 7-11. Nemecek, T., D. Dubois, O. Huguenin-Elie and G. Gaillard. 2011. Life cycle assessment of Swiss farming systems: I. Integrated and organic farming. Agricultural Systems 104: 217-232. Parton, W.J., M. Hartman, D. Ojima and D. Schimel. 1998. DAYCENT and its land surface submodel: description and testing. Glob. Planet. Change 19: 35-48. Smith, P. 2004. Carbon sequestration in croplands: the potential in Europe and the global context. Eur. J. Agron. 20: 229-236. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 4>
