Error Control Schemes for Wireless Broadband Access Networks The recent years have shown an increasing demand for broadband telecommunications, which is mainly driven by the introduction of new multimedia services. Moreover, the liberalization of the telecommunications market in Europe goes along with new service providers entering the market and trying to exploit new ways of connecting local users to the global information network. In order to circumvent the bottleneck imposed by the copper lines connecting the end-users, new techniques are required in order to establish a broadband access network at reasonable costs. Moreover, the tendency towards mobility and portability clearly indicates the growing importance of wireless access to broadband services. Wireless broadband access networks represent therefore a promising solution to meet the new requirements. In response to this situation the European Telecommunications Standards Institute ETSI has established a new standardization project for broadband radio access networks BRAN . The objective of the BRAN project is to specify the HIPERLAN/2 (High Performance Radio Local Area Network) standard, which is currently being finalized. Broadband access networks are typically based on the Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM), which supports quality of service (QoS) requirements for various service classes and is therefore very well suited to be used for multimedia applications. However, the success of the internet protocol has stimulated several proposals to introduce the support of QoS even in the Internet. The physical layer schemes envisaged for QoS-oriented networks are usually highly reliable wired networks operating at high bit-rates (e.g., SDH at 155 Mbit/s). A couple of severe problems arise when implementing a wireless access to a QoS-based network. The ATM protocol, for instance, was designed for fixed networks under the assumptions of a very low bit error rate, point-to-point transmission and full-duplex connections, what clearly contrasts with the characteristics of the wireless links with high bit error rate, broadcast transmission, and no dedicated direction for the transmission. It is therefore essential to introduce a Data Link Control (DLC) layer between the ATM and the physical layer. The DLC is in charge of improving the transmission quality by means of error control. A partial selective repeat Automatic Repeat Request (ARQ) protocol has been developed which represents an efficient combination of selective repeat and Go-Back-N ARQ protocols. Additionally, the new protocol features a flow control mechanism which dynamically adapts the transmission rate of a connection to the link quality. This prevents the channel from being blocked by a user with momentarily high transmission error probability and thus increases the total system throughput. Furthermore, the ARQ protocol is combined with a forward error control code. The resulting type II hybrid ARQ-scheme is based on the principle of incremental redundancy with redundant symbols being sent only when they are required.
