Coating Nanocomposites This project aims to develop a method to fabricate inorganic-organic hybrid nanoparticles, then introduce the particles into specific matrix according to different application purposes. The main task is to understand the principle behind dispersion behavior of the hybrid nanoparticles. Inorganic-organic nanocomposites are playing a major role in the development of advanced functional materials due to their distinctive advantages in term of optical, electronic, magnetic and mechanical properties. Along this line, polymers, as typical organic materials, are the most widely used matrix of the nanocomposites because one can artificially design their properties on molecular level. Various synthesis and processing techniques, such as in-situ polymerization, melting mixing, painting, coating, etc., have been developed to make the nanocomposites. However, the prerequisite for their successful preparation is avoiding aggregation and phase separation of the nanoparticles within the matrixes during the processing, which is often the most difficult task along the entire preparation process. Therefore, it often becomes necessary to modify physically or chemically the surface of the nanoparticles in order to improve the interfacial compatibility with the polymer matrix. In this project, we develop fundamentals and techniques for the preparation of inorganic-organic hybrid materials for both water-based and organic solvent-based paintings and coatings, where the organic material is a polymer forming the matrix and the inorganic component is in the form of nanoparticles. The objective is that with the developed hybrid materials, the inorganic nanoparticles in the formed films or membranes are distributed individually and randomly without aggregation, leading to desired optical, electronic or mechanical properties. One example is to prepare TiO2acrylic polymer based coating materials for making films of optical and mechanical applications, where the TiO2 nanoparticles of high concentrations must be distributed in the polymer films without aggregation. The strategy to reach the goal is to synthesize TiO2 core-polymer shell hybrid nanoparticles. The polymer for the shell is chemically compatible to the polymer used for the film matrix and soluble in the solvent used for preparation of the coating materials.
