The Zurich Study on the Social Development of Children and Youths (z-proso) z-proso investigates how individual, family, school and neighbourhoodrelated factors interact in the social development of children and adolescents. Using a longitudinal design, it focusses specifically on the development of problem behaviour and violence during the life-course. This project continues the Zurich Study on the Social Development of Children and Youth (zproso), which started in 2003. The study investigates how individual, family, school and neighbourhoodrelated factors interact in the social development of children and adolescents. Using a longitudinal design, it focusses specifically on the development of problem behaviour and violence during the life-course. Combined with the longitudinal study is a randomized field experiment which investigates the effects of two prevention programmes. At grade one half of the parents were offered to partcipate in a parenting programme (Triple P) while at grade two half of the children attended a social competence training at school (PATHS). One main aim of z-proso is to examine the long-term effects of this prevention programmes. z-proso includes a representative, multitethnic urban sample of about 1400 children who entered primary school in 2004. Initial participation was 74 percent among parents and 83 percent among children. The retention rate to date (wave 6 in 2013; age 15.5 years) is 92 percent of the initial participants. Between 2004 and 2013 a wide range of data on the participants and their social environment was collected from children, parents and teachers. The current project extends the longitudinal study into the late adolescence of the project participants. The upcoming seventh data collection wave will include a school-based written participant survey at age 17-18 and a postal teacher survey. The data collection will be carried out between March and July 2015. The questionaire will cover a wide range of topics, including stressful life events and biographical turning points, leisure time activities and media use, attitudes towards violence and aggression, delinquency, substance use, and victimization. A main focus will be the on the cognitive and emotional processes entailed in delinquent decision making during adolescence. The empirical analyses will focus on the interplay of risk factors from different life domains of the participants. Additionally the long-term effects of early prevention programmes will be tracked into late adolescence. z-proso aims at generating evidence on how to improve social skills and reduce externalising problem behaviour among children and adolescents. The fourth phase of the study is jointly funded by the Jacobs Foundation and the Swiss National Science Foundation.
