Signaling in the rhizosphere: interactions between beneficial pseudomonads, crop plants and root pathogens PhD students: Mélanie Bottiglieri, Patrice De Werra Soil-borne fungal pathogens attack plant roots and cause important damage to crop health worldwide. Environmental and public health concerns restrict the use of pesticides in soil to control these root diseases. The treatment of soil or planting material with certain strains of plant-beneficial, root-colonizing Pseudomonas spp. is a promising alternative to control root diseases. Research over the past decade has made some major progress in identifying the mechanisms involved in disease suppression and has recognized the production of antibiotic metabolites that inhibit fungal pathogens as a major biocontrol trait of these bacteria. Antibiotic production in beneficial pseudomonads is controlled by complex regulatory networks that respond to biotic and abiotic environmental signals. Variability in the expression of antibiotic activity in response to such signals in the rhizosphere is considered to be a major reason for a tendency of inconsistent biocontrol performance of beneficial pseudomonads, an important impediment to their commercial use. There is evidence that the microbiota and especially the plant host have a strong impact on antibiotic production in the rhizosphere, yet the mechanisms and plant signals involved are largely unknown. Our project is based on the assumption that certain plant-derived compounds, in particular phenolics, are major factors determining levels and specificity of antibiotic activity in root-associated beneficial pseudomonads. Plant phenolics are abundantly present in the rhizosphere and they have prominent functions as signals in plant defense and in some symbiotic and pathogenic plantmicrobe interactions. We will focus on plant effects on the production of the two antibiotics 2,4diacetylphloroglucinol (DAPG) and pyoluteorin (PLT) by the well-characterized biocontrol strain P. fluorescens CHA0. DAPG and PLT are key determinants of biocontrol activity in this strain and in many other pseudomonads that contribute to natural soil suppressivness to root diseases. We have evidence that strain CHA0 keeps these antibiotics at a fine-tuned balance that can be affected by certain microbial and plant phenolics. We speculate that changes in the release of specific phenolic effectors by roots of different plant species (e.g., following pathogen-attack) may critically influence the balance of antibiotic production, thereby affecting biocontrol activity and competitive behavior of the pseudomonad in the rhizosphere.
