Causal Models of Perturbation Data with Applications to Pathogen Infection and Cancer (FEL) Causal Models of Perturbation Data with Applications to Pathogen Infection and Cancer (FEL) Networks of interacting proteins constitute the molecular machinery underlying basic cellular processes, and their malfunction gives rise to diseases. For example, pathogens may manipulate protein networks of their hosts in order to invade the target cell, whereas cancer is driven by genomic alterations that rewire protein networks and alter their function. The objective of this proposal is to develop a computational modeling approach for inferring causal relations among proteins in cellular networks. The evidence for this inference will come from perturbations of the protein network. The inherent problem of this approach is that perturbation is rarely a clean-cut local intervention in the network. Instead, each perturbed component interacts with confounding, hidden parts of the system. The proposed method is based on deep analysis and mathematical modeling of the nature of problems inherent to the perturbation approach. One such problem is the determination of the hidden variables that confound the analysis of the system. Another is the investigation of how the effect of interventions spreads through the protein network to distant variables that are measured experimentally. In a unified model, we will integrate known causal relations among variables representing proteins with the unknown links to variables corresponding to the measured effects. The initial, knowledge-based model will be iteratively refined to best fit the data, taking into account the suspected hidden variables. Our milestones include: (i) Development of statistical methods and computational algorithms (ii) Two specific biological applications: First, modeling causal interactions among proteins involved in pathogen infection, based on external perturbations of thousands of genes in individual host cells. Second, modeling cancer patient data, treating genomic alterations as natural, internal perturbations to protein networks in cancer cells. (iii) Computational and experimental validation. The inferred causal models will be used to answer new biological questions and to design new experiments. We will compare the models between different pathogens, looking for overlaps. The analysis of hidden variables is expected to point at important parts of the analyzed system that otherwise would remain uncovered. For both the pathogen and the cancer data, our approach can help identifying potential drug targets. The proposed methodology can be used to model and interpret any perturbation data, addressing key questions at the heart of molecular biology.
