Sweet and waxy roots: genome engineering for producing new nontransgenic cassava varieties. We intend to test CRISPRs-mediated genome editing technologies to edit cassava genome and modify starch properties and reduce cyanide content Advanced genome engineering of cassava (Manihot esculenta Crantz) - a staple food for over 600 million people and an important commercial crop - will allow rapid generation of non-transgenic varieties with favourable traits for food security and commercial applications. This proof-of-concept study will advance cassava and crop biotechnology for the 21st Century. Genome engineering will be used to disrupt expression of characterised genes, including granulebound starch synthase 1 (GBSS1) and cytochrome P450 (cytP450) in cassava. Downregulation of GBSS1 leads to a reduction in amylose content 1, resulting in a waxy root that is favoured for starch extraction in commercial processing. CytP450, however, catalyzes the first step in the a cyanogenic glucoside whose breakdown leads to the production of biosynthesis of linamarin U hydrogen cyanide. High levels of cyanogen compounds give the edible root a bitter taste, and can cause an irreversible neurological disease in humans if the roots are insufficiently processed 2. Downregulation of cytP450 results in a reduction in linamarin production 3. Transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs) and clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPRs) systems will be used to downregulate GBSS1 and cytP450 following PEG-mediated transformation of cassava protoplasts derived from friable embryogenic callus (FEC; cultivar 60444). TALENs constructs are emerging in crop research and have been used successfully to breed disease resistance in rice 4. CRISPRs have only been used in human, mice and zebrafish studies 5-7 and therefore pose a unique challenge in this project. To assist, gus and gfp pCAMBIA transformed Arabidopsis will serve as test plants to visualise construct efficiency. The modified cassava protoplasts will be tested with the SURVEYOR mutation detection assay; plants via molecular, biochemical assays and next-generation sequencing (e.g. PACBIO and mRNA-Seq) to produce a comprehensive review of genetic variation in modified material. It is important to highlight that cultivated cassava very rarely produce flowers. Instead, propagation (in vitro and farming) is via stem cuttings. Although genome engineering relies upon segregation to expunge the assembly constructs, ground-breaking research at ETH Zurich is underway to induce early flowering and seed development in glasshouse-grown cassava using CaMV35S:FT plasmids 8. This fellowship will contribute to this ongoing study, ensuring availability of material for use with selected TALENs-based constructs. This proposal seeks to revolutionise breeding programmes and fundamental research of this important crop via the implementation of advanced genome editing and through the production of early flowering cassava capable of bearing seed.
