Extension of the Development and implementation of methods to homogenize daily and sub-daily surface climate data Homogenisation of surface climate data is essential for the accurate monitoring of climate variability and climate change. In this project we develop new, physics-based methods to better homogenize long, subdaily, meteorological series from several Swiss stations back to the 18th century. Homogenisation of surface climate data is essential for the accurate monitoring of climate variability and climate change. Often, it is the extremes of weather and climate which have the greatest impact on society. However, the accurate determination of variability and trends in climate extremes requires much greater effort of data quality assurance. Currently only a few statistical methods exist to help homogenise daily climate data. These methods are fundamentally different from traditional methods which have been used on monthly or annual climate data. Further research is needed in order to assess the impact of inhomogeneities on the climate record at the finer temporal scales. This proposal is an extension of the approved proposal submitted in spring 2008. At that time only one third of the grant support was approved since we indented to share the money between two institutes within one year. In order to process the full complexity of our project-plan we hereby apply for the remaining two thirds of the grant support. We therefore havenSt changed our project-plan but adjusted a) the schedule up to 24 additional months and b) the financial support accordingly. Within the context of COST Action ES0601 this project aims to: T ¸ Contribute to the goals of Working Group 4: Methods for homogenisation of daily data, namely: The testing, development and dissemination existing/new correction methods/strategies for daily or sub-daily surface climate data. The expected outcomes of this project are: T ¸ Compare existing methods for homogenizing daily and sub-daily surface climate data: Quantifying the added value of the techniques to our understanding of climate variability and extreme events in Switzerland. T ¸ Conduct research into the development of new and/or existing methods: Explore the added value of using physical models combined with statistical techniques to improve data quality. T ¸ Apply the most adapted methods to long-term daily temperature and precipitation in Switzerland: Report on the improved understanding of climate variability and climate extremes in Switzerland from the mid-19th century to present.
