Developing the next generation of geodetic and time-dependent seismic hazard models for China The 2008 Sichuan earthquake has once again illustrated the increasing risk that earthquakes pose to modern societies. This devastating earthquake of magnitude Mw7.9 killed almost 90,000 people. The earthquake left at least 5 to 11 million people without housing; estimated total damages exceed US$20 billion. While an earthquake of this size in Switzerland is highly unlikely, it has been estimated that a repeat of the Basel earthquake with an assumed magnitude of Mw=6.9 would cost 10 and 80 billion CHF in damage and fatalities might exceed 10'000. With this proposal we seek the funds improve the understanding of seismic hazard in a few selected and related key areas: 1. Geodetic models. China has invested heavily into creating a GPS based network for deformation monitoring, a network of up to 2000 stations. We will work on creating and validating probabilistic seismic hazard maps based on deformation vectors. 2. Time-dependent seismic hazard models. Time-dependent seismic hazard assessment is a critical next step in improving probabilistic seismic hazard assessment. ETH is one of the leading institutions on developing time-dependent earthquake forecast models. In partnership with Chinese scientists, we will develop and calibrate time-dependent PSHA models for China, which particularly are a highly valuable resource for aftershocks hazard assessment, a high priority task in the aftermath of the Sichuan event. As part of this development, we will install a prototype testing environment for time-dependent hazard models. 3. Validation and Testing. The seismological community has recognized in recent years the importance of community based rigorous retrospective and prospective testing and validation of hazard models. This includes the models developed under points 1 and 2. ETH in partnership with the southern California Earthquake Center (SCEC) and GNS Science (New Zealand) are leading global efforts to set up the framework of the international Collaboratory for the Study of Earthquake Predictability (CSEP, www.cseptesting.org). Within this proposal, we propose to set up in close collaboration with our Chinese partners a prototype testing environment for earthquake forecast models.
