Maintaining supply while reducing losses of N in cropping systems: Feedbacks between plant, soil and microbial communities. This project will assess the activity of N cycling microorganisms to gain insights on potential N stabilization and turnover among various combinations of farming management practices by assessing the activity of N cycling microorganisms to gain insights on potential N stabilization and turnover and Description (including references to the titles of the attached graphics) Scpecific groups of functional microorganisms conduct key steps of nitrogen (N) transformations in soils. These transformations control the availability of N to plants and microorganisms, as well as, the susceptibility to losses. The main goal of this project is to examine the activity of functional microbes across a range of farming systems and management practices that provide the highest supply of N to plants while preventing environmental losses. More specifically: (i) Assess the abundance and activity of N cycling microorganisms to gain insights on potential N stabilization and turnover among various combinations of farming management practices. (ii) Examine the significance of microbial-mediated rhizosphere N cycling for plant growth and yield. ´ Samples will be taken from the SSwiss Arable Farming Systems TrialS (SAFST), Agroscope, that compares tillage regimes (conventional, reduced, and no till) and cover crop species (leguminous, non-leguminous, mixed, and no cover-crop) under both conventional and organic management. the main goal is to evaluate the agronomic, economic, and ecologiUsing a Ssystems ¸ approachT, cal services provided by the different production systems. Plant and soil samplings will occur in spring/summer of 2015 during the cover crop cultivation and across three growth stages of maize (emergence, grain filling, and physiological maturity). Laboratory analyses will occur following each of the field campaigns. Plant samples will provide an overall assessment of plant performance by measuring above- and below-ground biomass, yield, and N content. Through 15N stable isotope techniques, soil samples will be used to quantify mineralization and nitrification rates. A soil incubation setup will quantify potential denitrification rates. Soil microorganisms will be assed by quantification of microbial biomass N and detection of specific N cycling microorganisms. Based on field sampling, state-of-the-art approaches will examine the abundance and activity of functional microorganisms carrying out N transformations. DNA and RNA will be extracted from soil samples using commercially available kits. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) will quantify abundance and expression of functional genes in the DNA and RNA samples, respectively. Specific primers will be used to detect genes encoding enzymes responsible for the nitrification (amoA gene) and denitrification (nirK, nirS, and nosZ genes) processes. By integrating various disciplines such as plant and soil sciences, microbial ecology, and agronomy, this research will clarify the impacts of farming management practices on ecosystem functioning as regulated by soil, plant, and microbial interactions and contribute to the development of strategies for sustainable agroecosystem management. Materials and methods This project is structured around five work-packages (WP). Each work-package reflects a milestone of this research. Feasibility and alternatives demonstrate how the research program is structured to mitigate risk. RNA extraction optimization: Define a working method for RNA extraction adapted for WP1 U arable soils. Sample collection: Obtain plant and soil samples in four sampling campaigns: one during WP2 U cover-crop cultivation, and three samplings during different phenological stages of maize. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> Laboratory analyses: Accomplishment of all laboratory analyses planned for Objective 1 WP3 U and 2. Plant parameters: shoot and root biomass, yield, leave and root N content. Soil parameters: mineral N content, mineralization rate, nitrification rate, potential denitrification. Microbial parameters: abundance and expression of amoA, nirK, nirS, and nosZ genes. Data analyses: Statistical analyses and interpretation of data collected in Objective 1 and WP4 U 2. Findings dissemination: Accomplishment of the dissemination plan proposed below, which WP5 U includes preparation of manuscripts, conference presentations, and incorporation of the findings into farmerSs meetings. Equipment used - Real-time PCR - Nano-drop - 2100 Bioanalyzer - Gas Chromatograph - Carbon and nitrogen analyzer Preliminary results (with references to graphics that are uploaded in separate file) Project is under data acquisition stage Discussion Project is under data acquisition stage Relevant literature - Cardon, Z. G., & Gage, D. J. (2006). Resource exchange in the rhizosphere: molecular tools and the microbial perspective. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Evol. Syst., 37, 459-488. - Frank, D. A., & Groffman, P. M. (2009). Plant rhizospheric N processes: what we don't know and why we should care. Ecology, 90(6), 1512-1519. - Henderson, S. L., Dandie, C. E., Patten, C. L., Zebarth, B. J., Burton, D. L., Trevors, J. T., & Goyer, C. (2010). Changes in denitrifier abundance, denitrification gene mRNA levels, nitrous oxide emissions, and denitrification in anoxic soil microcosms amended with glucose and plant residues. Applied and environmental microbiology, 76(7), 2155-2164. - Kong, A.Y.Y., Fonte, S.J., van Kessel, C., Six, J. (2009). Transitioning from standard to minimum tillage: Trade-offs between soil organic matter stabilization, nitrous oxide emissions, and N availability in irrigated cropping systems. Soil Tillage Research, 104, 256-262. - Németh, D. D., Wagner-Riddle, C., & Dunfield, K. E. (20
