Compound-specific radiocarbon analysis of lake sediments. We are developing the methodology for compound.specific radiocarbon dating of lipids. The aim is to study the long-term cycling of carbon in soils by analyzing soilderived biomarkers in lake sediments. In addition we will apply this method for radiocarbon dating of Lake and marine sediments. Over the past decades, much progress has been made in the understanding of past climate and environments, and much of this information has been derived from lake and ocean sedimentary records. However, there are also still many gaps in the knowledge of the global climate change, and there are practical issues that hamper research in this direction. We propose to tackle two of these issues using the relatively new technique of compound-specific radiocarbon analysis. First, we aim at improving our understanding of the build-up and dynamics of the terrestrial soil organic carbon (SOC) pool. SOC constitutes an important reservoir in the global carbon cycle and, therefore, a better knowledge of its dynamics is of paramount importance for the prediction of its behavior as a source or sink under increasing atmospheric CO2 contents. This will be done by building on the successful approach of Smittenberg et al. (2006) using the radiocarbon ages of soil-derived molecular compounds and organic matter fractions, as preserved in well-dated and well-constrained sedimentary records, and comparing those with the actual age of deposition of the sediment. Our second aim is to further develop the technique of compound-specific radiocarbon dating. Chronologies of natural archives like lake sediments are typically based on radiocarbon dating of organic material that has been deposited soon after its biosynthesis. However, only a small fraction of studied lakes contains recognizable terrestrial macrofossils that can be used for radiocarbon dating, more often sediments are barren of terrigenous macrofossils, making radiocarbon dating a challenge or even impossible. Some lakes also suffer from a hard water effect" caused by weathering of radiocarbon-free carbonate rocks, affecting the age of aquatic-derived organic matter. We thus propose to develop compound-specific radiocarbon dating of organic compounds derived from either terrestrial material that has not been pre-aged in the soils in the catchments or from an aquatic source if no hard water effect is present, as a tool to bypass the chronological problems that plague many important records of climate change. The proposed research will focus on the practical aspects of purification of individual compounds from the complex mixture of sedimentary organic matter, as well as on that of radiocarbon dating of small samples. For this, the modern techniques of high-performance liquid chromatography U mass spectrometry will be used, as well as the newly developed gas-source for sample introduction into an accelerator mass spectrometer (AMS), allowing radiocarbon analysis of very small samples. The proposed research has the potential to provide many new insights and to produce results with a wide applicability. One outcome will be a thorough and rigorous test of the potential of compoundspecific radiocarbon dating for lacustrine sediments, which could be of great importance to the large and very active scientific community studying climate change of the last 40,000 years. Secondly, valuable knowledge will be gained about the development and evolution of refractory soil organic carbon over time, bearing directly on outstanding questions about carbon cycling and fluxes. Finally, through these studies we expect to further develop analytical methods for the determination of radiocarbon in organic compounds. These methods have applications not only in earth science but also in the detection of the origin and transformation of pollutants in the environment, and might also be useful as a non-invasive method for the determination of metabolic pathways c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> and carbon cycling in complex natural microbial systems.
