Multidisciplinary study Of Continental/ocean Climate dynamics using High-resolution records from the eastern mediterraneAn (MOCCHA) In this project we aim at reconstructing climate change at decadal scale from sediment cores from the Gulf of Taranto. This is a ESF-EUROMARC project in cooperation with the University of Bremen and University of Utrecht. Continuous marine high-resolution climate records with sufficient time resolution are needed to detect high-frequency variations in paleo-climate. Such records are rare but vital for our understanding of causes and consequences of climate and environmental change at decadal to millennial time scales. Our initial studies at a near-coastal and a deep Mediterranean anoxic basin site seem to provide a continuous marine paleo-climate record that permits high-resolution and well dated climate reconstructions. We propose to extend our pilot projects to assess if these sites are suitable for future IODP drilling. The eastern Mediterranean Sea is particularly sensitive to climate change and its sediments have been shown to faithfully record this from long-term glacial and interglacial time scales to decadal oscillations. In recent years significant progress has been made in documenting and understanding short-term fluctuations in Mediterranean climate. Lithological, geochemical and palaeobiological studies have shown that climate changes have deeply influenced the whole basinSs marine ecosystem. Temperature variations have been deduced from organic biomarkers, planktic assemblages and changes in oxygen isotopic and elemental composition of foraminifers. In addition, catastrophic modifications of the physical and chemical structure of the Mediterranean water masses have been reported, sometimes leading to periods of deep and intermediate water anoxia during which ~ organic carbon-rich layers (sapropels) have been deposited. The last such a period ended 6000 years ago. The lack of bioturbation and the high sedimentation rates during these relatively short periods result in well preserved and undisturbed sediments, essential for detailed, high resolution palaeo-environmental studies within a multi-proxy framework. However, continuous paleoclimate records are not possible in such pelagic sediments as these have undergone bioturbation, significant compositional degeneration of organic material including biomarkers, partial dissolution of carbonate species, and complete removal of all biogenic silica. In contrast, the two sites now explored by us, seems to permit continuous high-resolution paleoclimate studies; in particular the nearcoastal site having a continuous high-frequency 11-yr climate cycle for the thusfar recovered last 4.000 years. These sites are: A. the near-coastal Gallipoli shelf area and B. the deep hypersaline anoxic basin site.
