Environment and Cooperation in the Nile Basin (ECONILE) The River Nile lies at the centre of a complex system of waterways, economic and political aspirations, various development programs, basic human needs and sophisticated management methods. It is a supreme paradigm of how (or whether) humanity can meet one of its greatest challenges: the sustainable use of scarce resources. ECONILE aims to assess the present-day development of international water usage in the Nile Basin. The goal of the project is to enhance cooperation between the Nile countries. It will complement and expand the intergovernmental search for viable water management options in the Nile Basin. The project is to be carried out in close cooperation with partners in the Nile Basin (governmental organisations, research institutes, and non-governmental organisations). The downstream and upstream perspectives will be examined separately by two research units that will: - Assess the environmental situation - Examine the socio-economic and political aspects of water management - Gather the different perceptions and management options suggested by the various stakeholders in the downstream and upstream context - Form a synthesis from these perspectives From the resulting synthesis, options for the management of the whole basin will be extrapolated and assessed in the framework of sustainable development. Research: - Research in Egypt and Sudan carried out by Simon A. Mason (M.Sc. Environmental Science). Environmental aspects in Egypt supervised by Prof. Dr. Waleed Hamza, Dept. Environmental Science, Faculty of Science, Alexandria University, Egypt. Environmental aspects in the Sudan supervised by Prof. Dr. Osman Mirghani Mohamed Ali, Institute of Environmental Studies, University of Khartoum, Sudan. Political aspects in Sudan supervised by Prof. Dr. Atta El-Battahani, Department of Political Science, University of Khartoum, Sudan c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> - Research in Ethiopia and the other upstream countries carried out by Yacob Arsano (M.A. Political Science)
