Security - The Trend of Opinions on Foreign, Security, and Defense Policy The annual study DSecurity S ¸U aims to highlight trends in Academy at the ETH and the Center for Security Studies of the ETH U public opinion on security related issues in Switzerland. It is based on annual or biannual surveys of the Swiss voting population. Since the end of the Cold War, the traditional patterns of SwitzerlandSs foreign, security, and defense policy have been changing. The end of bipolar confrontation demanded a rethinking of the tradition of armed neutrality and independent national defense at SwitzerlandSs borders. Switzerland was urged to redefine its place in Europe (e.g. the relationships with the European Union and NATO), and to reflect upon a possible integration of Switzerland into international security organizations. Thus, Switzerland is at the start of a fundamental reorientation of its security policy. What is the trend of opinions on these issues among the Swiss? In this case, the studies help determine trends in the shaping of public opinion on security and foreign policy in Switzerland. The annual DSicherheit S ¸ studies, published jointly by the Military Academy at the ETH Zurich and the Center for Security Studies and Conflict Research, assess long-range trends and tendencies in Swiss opinion formation regarding security and defense policies. The studies correspond to an increasing public interest in questions related to security policy. They should give an easily accessible information basis for the observation of long-term trend developments. For this purpose, important questions are raised concerning basic mental attitudes. The studies are based upon representative surveys conducted each year since 1991. They contain core questions on security and defense policy, as well as in-depth surveys on selected current security topics. DSicherheit S ¸ is published in autumn of each year and contains, in addition to the results of the survey, a chronology of the yearSs events that may have affected opinion formation and an analysis and summary of the study and results in three languages. The Publication can be obtained directly from the Center for Security Studies. A full-text electronic version is available on the Internet at: http://www.fsk.ethz.ch/publ/output.cfm?service=publihouse&parent=1596
