A Multiscale Hysteretic XFEM Scheme for the Analysis of Composite Structures The aim of the project is to establish a methodology for simulating complex materials, the focus being on reinforced masonry structures. The goal is to achieve an accurate yet computationally efficient methodology for the simulation of dynamic phenomena relating to plasticity and damage. The current proposal forms an extension of an ongoing SNF project (#200021_146996) entitled The aim of the aforementioSMulti-Scale ¸ Modeling for the reinforcing of Historical StructuresT. ned project is to establish a methodology for the efficient treatment of complex materials, the focus being on reinforced masonry structures. The early work so far conducted within the framework of that project has already lead to straightforward extensions and parallel directions for improving the applicability of that approach and enhancing its capabilities, with a focus on fracture mechanics and the simulation of flaws in composite structures. The aim is to achieve an accurate and computationally efficient, and therefore widely applicable, methodology for the simulation of dynamic phenomena relating to plasticity and damage in structural systems. The driver for the development of such a methodology stems from the increasing use of composite materials which are already widely implemented into various engineering applications (i.e. the automotive industry, the space industry and aerospace industry) due to their enhanced mechanical properties such as high strength to weight ratio, high stiffness to weight ratio and high damping amongst others. Despite the significant developments in composite design and manufacturing, such materials have only recently been tested and implemented in Civil Engineering applications. Current numerical procedures, such as the Finite Element Method (FEM) and the eXtended Finite Element Method (XFEM) can be used, in principle, to solve such problems. However, the computational resources required would render the problem practically unsolvable. To overcome the computational problems arising, multiscale methods have recently been introduced to accurately model the behavior of heterogeneous materials and structures across various scales, while at the same time significantly reducing the required computational cost. To properly simulate the nonlinear response of composite structures, the following damage related phenomena need to be properly addressed, namely crack initiation, crack propagation and delamination. Nonetheless, when implemented within a damage mechanics framework, the computational advantages of standard multiscale finite element methods perish. The target of this project is to investigate the benefits of fusing multiscale techniques with a hysteretic FE formulation for modelling material nonlinearities and the XFEM method for modelling discontinuities, which is a direction not yet explored.
