Causal Suboptimal Control Strategy for Hybrid Electric Vehicles A typical problem in hybrid vehicles control is the fuel optimal command of the two power sources. In this project methods are investigated for the derivation of a suboptimal, but realizable controller. Motivation A typical problem arising in optimal control of hybrid vehicles, which typically combine an internal combustion engine and an electric motor with batteries and power amplifiers (Fig. 1), is the fuel optimal command of the two power sources for a driving cycle. Control strategies for hybrid electric vehicles The goal of this project is to develop real-time control strategies to minimize the fuel consumption of a given full parallel hybrid electric vehicle (HEV). These strategies are model-based and have to respect various constraints of the system, such as limited torque and speed of the power converters or limited current and state of charge of the electrical storage device. Additional constraints are furnished by the driver: The strategy must assure to fulfill the driver's torque demand. Two scenarios for strategies are being considered: a) No information about future driving conditions is available. Therefore, the strategy may be based only on information about the physics of the vehicle and recorded data, such as the past profiles of speed and elevation. Tools for such a problem are quasi-static modeling, optimal or suboptimal control and techniques to characterize measured profiles, such as clustering. b) Limited information about future driving conditions is available. It may be obtained by means of a navigational system with GPS and the user-defined destination or, for short time horizons, by radar onboard. While the tools listed in a) are also applied for this case, other techniques, such as model predictive control, are considered for providing improvements. Energetic Equivalence Control strategies for HEVs often base on the minimization of an equivalent power, that is the sum of the actual fuel power and the weighted electric power from the battery. The key point is the appropriate weighting of the electric energy versus the chemical energy, i.e fuel. Detailed analysis has been carried out in this project. This led to an patented algorithm, called T-ECMS (patent submission to the Deutsches Patent- und Markenamt (DPMA), namely Verfahren zur Bestimmung eines Leistungsaufteilfaktors in Hybridfahrzeugen , no. 10323722.4). Current Research c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> In order to quantify the performance of a control strategy, its resulting fuel consumption is compared to the consumption of the global optimal solution of the problem. This optimal solution is evaluated by means of dynamic programming (Fig. 2). This optimal solution is not only used for benchmarking, but also for deducing causal control strategies. Therefore, based on the optimal solution, the optimal weighting factor between electric and chemical energy, called equivalence factor, is evaluated for each point in the state and time space (Fig. 3). Based on this insight, a fully causal control strategy can be derived. Such a control does not rely on information about future driving conditions. For the case where such information is available, it is taken into account for an appropriate online computation of the equivalence factor. Specifically, knowledge of the future topographic profile by means of a global positioning system (GPS) and topographic maps leads to additional fuel savings. Outlook The focus is on investigation of the appropriate equivalence factor as a function of the actual state of the vehicle, available information about the expected future driving cycle, and also on vehicle parameters.
