Development of a modular, dynamic modelling tool for long-term planning of urban drainage infrastructure The longevity of urban drainage systems, high investment and rehabilitation needs as well as altering future conditions and demands call for a long-term planning approach. The project contributes with planning instruments being capable to cope with the challenges induced by a long planning horizon. The PhD-project Development of a modular, dynamic modelling tool for long-term planning of urban drainage infrastructure is linked to the NRP-61 project Sustainable Water Infrastructure Planning (SWIP). Main goal of this project is to develop an improved, integrated and participatory planning procedure for water supply and urban drainage infrastructure management that balances economy, the ecological impact of the water services and social aspects by integrating stakeholder values. Urban drainage infrastructures such as sewers and wastewater treatment plants are costly and longlived, but aging. Demands and pressure on urban drainage systems will alter considerably e.g. due to socio-economic, demographic and climate changes. Both the longevity of urban drainage infrastructure, changing impacts and requirements on urban drainage systems as well as economical constraints call for a long-term planning approach. Infrastructure planning is demanding not only due to the complex system behavior of the interacting system elements urban catchment, sewer system, wastewater treatment plant and receiving water. A long term planning approach requires in addition to cope with large uncertainties due to a rather unknown future development of socioeconomics, demographics and climate. The existing planning procedure for urban drainage infrastructure in Switzerland does not involve long-term strategic planning instruments. Adequate modeling tools being capable to assess future planning alternatives of urban drainage infrastructure in terms of system performance, costs and uncertainties are still not available. The Dynamic Urban Drainage Infrastructure Model (DUDIM) comprises modules for prediction of future sewer pipe conditions, investment and rehabilitation costs, assessment of service level during dry and wet weather as well as ecological impacts of future urban drainage alternatives on receiving waters. Further requirements on this planning tool are to cope with limited data availability and quality and the quantification of uncertainties of model outputs.
