Research Project and Exhibition Alberto Camenzind Amongst the Modern Architecture in Ticino the work of the 1914 born Alberto Camenzind is of outstanding importance. Together with the work of numerous Ticino Architects of the same generation, his work, which include a large number of villas, public buildings and important urban design projects, represents the Modern Architecture of the 40ties, 50ties and 60ties within the Ticino. But also with its role as an example for the actual tendences in Ticino Architecture, this generation of post-war Modernists were of large significance. Althought Alberto Camenzinds uvre consists of various aspects, the adoption of his uvre is mostly limited to its architectural work. So he interrupted his constructing period in 1959 in order to follow the call to the Exposition Nationale Suisse of 1964 in Lausanne as chiefarchitect, where he was in charge to draw the concept as well as to create one of the most important parts. After this, he was offered a chair at the ETH Zurich, where he concentrated on another aspect of his work, the teaching, until 1981. Despite the undisputable importance of Alberto Camenzind as a example for the evolution of Modern Architecture in Ticino and his role as a teacher of generations of Swiss architects, his work is rather incompletly documented. Thus althought there are only very few publications of some of his buildings, which represent only a small part of Alberto Camenzinds work. The scope of this research project is to incorporate critically the complete work of Alberto Camenzind in all its three aspects - his architectural work, his work at the Expo 64 and his teaching at the ETH Zurich. In the series of Dokumente zur modernen Schweizer Architektur of the Institut gta a publication will be presented in order to document these three aspects by a number of articles of various authors. Additionally to this publication an exhibition, that will be held in the peroid between December 1996 and January 1997, will show the work of Alberto Camenzind. The catalogue to the exhibition has been published now (october 98)! For orders please contact: publikationen@gta.arch.ethz.ch
