Search for Exotic Couplings in Polarized Muon Decay Many extensions of the Standard Model (SM) of electroweak interactions introduce new couplings beyond the vector and axial-vector which, if present, may also contribute to direct muon decay. In models where lepton family numbers are conserved, the most general four-fermion interaction can be described in terms of 10 effective complex amplitudes associated with the nature of the interaction (scalar, vector or tensor) and to the chirality states of the charged leptons. The (V-A) interaction assumed in the SM corresponds to only one of these couplings being unity and all the others vanishing. Present limits on these other amplitudes reach values as large as 0.550. This project is focused on the relative measurement of the longitudinal polarization (PL) of positrons emitted from polarized muons. In a particular domain of phase-space, the positron polarization may become strongly sensitive to a specific combination of exotic couplings describing the muon decay process. This is realized by positrons emitted backwards relative to the muon spin, from highly polarized muons and near the endpoint of the Michel spectrum. In the first phase of the experiement the precision goal on PL is 0.03 which corresponds to a factor of 80 improvement over the only existing measurement of the angle and energy dependence of the longitudinal polarization. The measurement uses the surface muon piE3 beam at the Paul Scherrer Institute. The muons are implanted in a thin aluminium target and the high momentum decay positrons are focused to the polarimeter by means of two magnetic lenses. The positron momentum will be determined using a transmission silicon tracker located in a uniform magnetic field. The polarization will be measured from Bhabha scattering and annihilation processes. The polarimeter comprises a set of magnetized foils sandwiched between wire chambers, a plastic scintillator hodoscope and a BGO calorimeter to detect either the (e+,e-) or (gamma-gamma) pairs.
