Project to set-up a metrological infrastructure for electrochemical analysis applied to chemistry, biotechnology and laboratory medicine at the Swiss Federal Office for Metrology and Accreditation (METAS). ItSs a fundamental truth that classical analytical procedures do not respond to the same quantities as chemical sensors, biosensors and bioassays. Especially when these methods are applied and exposed to a complex specimen directly, the results deviate from wet chemical methods such as spectroscopy, AAS, chromatography etc. Remarkably, quantities such as molality and active molality and their units recommended by IUPAC are rarely used in practical analytical chemistry even if method comparisons reveal the differences in the results. Enterprises frequently suffer from the drawback of being unable to refer the results of chemical sensors and bioassays, even of pH-electrodes, developed in-house to an independent primary analytical procedure based on sensor technology. This situation is especially crucial for start-up en terprises. The collaboration between the SSwiss ¸ Federal Office of Metrology and AccreditationT and CCS is focused on the development and installation of primary standard methods, primarily of electrochemical methods, on which the data collected by commercialized electrodes and electrochemical instruments can be traced back. The fundamentals of electrochemical analysis were published in teaching books long ago, and they are generally well accepted in the scientific community. Therefore, the goal of the project is to compare the results yielded from electrochemical experiments under very well controlled conditions with results which are yielded mathematically based on generally accepted physico-chemical models and algorithms. Results yielded by using electrochemical basic equipment must coincide with the results yielded by calculations within defined limits of uncertainty. Fundamental quantities such as molality and active molality are defined by IUPAC, and are referred to the amount of solvent in a sample. These quantities need to get generally accepted in analytical chemistry. METAS has the legal power to contribute to the efforts of European and International Bodies to achieve the international comparability of analytical results and to get through data reporting in the appropriate units. Referenzen: U.E.Spichiger, R.Eugster, A.Schmid, P.Gehrig, B.Rusterholz, W.Simon. Application of an IonSelective Magnesium Electrode on Human Blood Serum. Proceedings of an International Symposium of the Working Group on Selective Electrodes (and Sensors) IFCC/WGSE, Monterey, CA, July 19th-20th, 1990. In: R.W.Burnett, N.Gochman, G.A.Graham, A.H.Maas, R.F.Moran, A.L.VanKessel, eds. Methodology and Clinical Applications of Blood Gases, pH, Electrolytes and Sensor Technology. Utrecht: Elinkwijk, pp 279-286, 1990 Ursula E. Spichiger-Keller, Ed. (1998), Chemical Sensors/Biosensors for Medical and Biological Applications. Weinheim: Wiley-VCH. International Federation of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Scientific Division, Working Group on Selective Electrodes. R.W. Burnett, P.DSOrazio, N. Fogh-Andersen, K. Kuwa, W.R. Külpmann, L. Larsson, A. Lewenstam, A.H.J. Maas, G. Mager, U. Spichiger-Keller. IFCC recommendation on reporting results for blood glucose. Clinica Chimica Acta 307, 205-209, 2001. International Federation of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Scientific Division, Working Group on Selective Electrodes (2002). Burnett RW, Hartford (US), Covington AK, Newcastle upon Tyne (UK), DSOrazio P, Lexington (US), Fogh-Andersen N, Copenhagen (DK), Kuwa K, Tsukuba (JP), Külpmann W, Hannover (DE), Larsson L, Linkoping (SE), Lewenstam A, ÅboTurku (FI), Maas AHJ, Utrecht (NL), Mager G, Bad Homburg (DE), Spichiger-Keller U, Zürich c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> (CH). GUIDELINES FOR SAMPLING, MEASURING AND REPORTING IONIZED MAG nNESIUM IN UNDILUTED SERUM, PLASMA OR WHOLE BLOOD. International Federation of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Scientific Division, Working Group on Selective Electrodes (2002). Burnett RW, Hartford (US), Covington AK, Newcastle upon Tyne (UK), DSOrazio P, Lexington (US), Fogh-Andersen N, Copenhagen (DK), Kuwa K, Tsukuba (JP), Külpmann W, Hannover (DE), Larsson L, Linkoping (SE), Lewenstam A, ÅboTurku (FI), Maas AHJ, Utrecht (NL), Mager G, Bad Homburg (DE), Spichiger-Keller U, Zürich (CH), Zijlstra WG, Groningen (NL), RECOMMENDATION FOR MEASURING AND REPORTING IONIZED CHORIDE IN UNDILUTED BLOOD PLASMA AND SERUM.
