TubeX SystemX The goal of TubeX is to develop and use modeling tools to investigate and describe the molecular principles underlying the multiscale organization and dynamics of the microtubule cytoskeleton using yeast as a model system. The morphology of cells and underlying cellular architecture is the emerging result of the action complex and dynamical macromolecular systems generically called the cytoskeleton. This network is composed of several macromolecular filament systems, among which microtubules play a central role, and a multitude of regulatory sub-networks linking filament behavior to spatial and temporal cues. Microtubule filaments are of particular importance because they are polar and show the ability to oscillate dynamically between phases of growth and shrinkage. As such, microtubule networks play a crucial role in organizing the cytoplasm, in positioning organelles relative to each other, and in guiding cellular polarity. During mitosis, probably the most ancient and the most fascinating morphogenetic process, microtubules organize the mitotic spindle that separates the two copies of the replicated genome at the center of the cell and segregates them to opposite ends of the cell. Studies of microtubule filaments have brought deep insights about their many functions; however, we are still at the beginning of understanding how cells control the organization and plasticity of their cytoskeleton. While these filament systems continuously draw their subunits from the soluble, apparently isotropic fraction of the cytoplasm, they show remarkably different properties depending on the cellular areas that they colonize and organize. Thus, a current challenge is to understand and model how the nature and dynamics of cytoskeletal networks, which takes place at the molecular scale, are controlled at the cellular scale. The goal of TubeX is to develop and use sophisticated modeling tools to investigate and describe the molecular principles underlying the multiscale organization and dynamics of microtubule networks, using yeast as a model system.
