13C-18O bonds in carbonate minerals: Calibration and applications of a new paleothermomether in Earth Sciences. With this project we will develop a new carbonae paleothermometer based on the abundance of 13C-18O bonds in the carbonate molecule. We will then apply this new method for paleoclimate reconstructions from marine and lacustrine sediments. Oxygen isotope paleothermometry on biogenic and inorganic carbonates is one of the cornerstones of paleoclimate research and of geological sciences of the last four decades. This method is based on the measurement of the relative abundance of 18O and 16O in carbonate minerals, which had been shown by the theoretical work of Urey (1947) to be dependent on the temperature at which the mineral is formed. Although this method has provided a wealth of information in many research areas, it suffers from a basic problem: the oxygen isotope composition of carbonates not only depends on the temperature but also on the oxygen isotope composition of the water from which the carbonate mineral is formed. Thus, the reconstruction of temperatures always depends on an independent determination of the isotope composition of ancient waters, which is often difficult or even impossible to obtain. In the study of continental paleoclimates there is a considerable interest in reconstructing the oxygen isotope composition of rainfall in the past because it is a very useful input for Global Circulation Models to improve paleoclimatic reconstructions. Thus, a method that allows for temperatures to be reconstructed in order to calculate the isotope composition of waters from oxygen isotope composition of carbonates, would be very useful. A major step towards the resolution of this problem has recently been accomplished by the group of John Eiler, which has shown theoretically (Wang et al., 2004) and with initial calibration studies (Gosh et al., 2006a) that the abundance of the 13C-18O bond over a random distribution of isotopes in carbonate minerals, is temperature dependent and independent of the oxygen isotope composition of the waters from which the carbonate mineral is precipitated. Thus, determination of the oxygen isotope composition of a carbonate mineral coupled with the measurement of the abundance of the 13C-18O bond (in the following, referred to as the ?47 thermometer) allows one to calculate the temperature of mineral formation and the oxygen isotope composition of the water with the same measurement. These measurements can only be obtained with a mass spectrometer with a collector configuration that allows the simultaneous measurement of masses 44, 45, 46, 47, 48 and 49. Through the recent purchase of such an instrument (Themo element Delta V with a custom-designed 12 cup collector), coupled with an automated carbonate preparation device, we are now in the position to measure carbonate minerals with the high accuracy and reproducibility necessary for this new paleothermometer method. To our knowledge this is the first instrument installed worldwide with the capacity to measure the 5 masses contemporaneously coupled with an automated preparation system. Initial tests with the new instrument indicate that it should be possible to achieve the ´ 0.05 permil on sample sizes of approximately 0.1 mg of carbonecessary precision of better than s nate. This is a significant improvement over the published values of 5 mg sample size required by the system described in Gosh et al., 2006a, and thus we have the potential to attain the necessary precisions on small sample sizes, such as individual species of foraminifera, which are necessary for paleoclimatic reconstructions. The goals of the project proposed here are: 1) to test and refine the analytical procedures to improve the reproducibility and accuracy of these analyses; 2) to calibrate the ?47 thermometer method with synthetic carbonates precipitated at controlled temperatures; 3) to calibrate the mineral dolomite, which we can routinely precipitate in the laboratory; 4) apply the method to the solution of geo- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> logical and paleoclimatological problems. With the development of this method on an automated instrument we will be able to answer important questions in paleoclimatology, such as temperature and oxygen isotope variations of the ocean at glacial-interglacial scales, evaluate global temperature distributions in the Mesozoic, and greatly improve terrestrial temperature reconstruction based on lacustrine sediments. Applications in hydrothermal geochemistry will also be tested. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 4>
