Load-carrying behaviour of steel deck concrete composite slabs The use of profiled steel sheets in combination with a concrete layer results in a good solution for the construction of building floors. The project aims at analysing the longitudinal shear capacity of composite floors during service life. Background and aim The use of profiled steel sheets in conjunction with a concrete layer results in a good solution for the construction of building floors. Steel deck concrete composite slabs gain structural benefits, allow fast erection and are lightweight. Two design methods, namely the m-k-method and the partial connection method, are mainly used for the design of composite slabs. The reconstruction of Terminal B of Zurich airport allowed experimentally analysing the longitudinal shear bond behaviour of composite slabs with profiled steel sheets after 35 years in service. Terminal B at Zurich Airport was built in 1974. The two-storey building of Terminal B consisted of HEM 360 columns and virendeel girders. Secondary IPE 360 beams constituted the supports of the composite floor slab with profiled steel sheeting. Terminal B of Zurich airport is converted to implement the Schengen agreement with the European Union. As a precondition to reuse the existing structure it had to be shown that the structure still meets the safety and serviceability requirements in particular the longitudinal shear capacity of the composite slabs after 35 years in service. Description Ten full-scaled tests on simple beams with different shear span lengths, two continuous beam tests, two cantilever beam test, two punching shear tests and two tests on floor openings were performed in situ to experimentally investigate the load-carrying behaviour, and in particular the longitudinal shear capacity of the composite slabs. The test results on simple beams were assessed with the m-k-method and the partial shear connection method. Main result The results show that the profiled steel sheeting after 35 years in use still features good longitudinal shear strength and is fit for reuse as slab of Dock B of Zurich airport.
