A New Planar Finite-Element Represetation Scheme for Helical Structures A new numerical scheme for efficiently capturing the behaviour of helical structures with planar finite elements will be developed and its potential and limits will be identified. The results of the theoretical work will be useful in biomechanics or design of electrical power transmitting cables. Periodic structures appear in biological tissues and engineering applications such as aerospace material structures or cables. Understanding of the behaviour of such periodic structures comes increasingly into focus of several research areas, including biomechanics, sandwich structures, or cables containing helically wound wires used for transfer of mechanical loads, electrical power, or electro-magnetic signals. The research which we here propose has been inspired by the problems discovered in course of the project Lightweight RF Power Cable with High Phase Stability with the European Space Agency (ESTEC Contract No. 22589/09/NL/GLC), which will have ended at the time when the here proposed research starts. We simulate the response of the cableSs structure to mechanical and thermal loading which influences its signal-transfer properties. The cable contains several helically wound substructures. Because of the helical arrangement, each substructure is in contact with each other as well as other substructures; thus there are contact lines as well as contact points. We found it not feasible to build a detailed finite-element model of the cable with a length many times its diameter. Instead, we have obtained numerical results by inventing simplified models. The simplified models are based on homogenization methods where a detailed model of one periodic unit cell is analyzed to derive the properties of an anisotropic substitute material. The various substitute material models are then assembled to represent a cross-section of the complete cable structure. The approach has enabled us to estimate numerous cable properties and its response to thermo-mechanical loading. It also has left us with questions regarding the potential and limits of the models we have invented so far. We have found in the literature an idea for exploring the helical symmetry with reduced numerical simulation effort. However, we have found that the model simplifications explained by the originators can be carried significantly further by consistent mechanical modelling. Specifically, our new model will only require a two-dimensional mesh instead of a disk of volume elements. It will combine the thought of helical symmetry with the techniques for modelling a state of generalized plane strain, which we have applied in our own previous work. The new model will capture the mechanical behaviour of a periodic system with a two-dimensional model mapping the geometry of a cross-section only. The constancy of the state of strains and stresses along helical lines will be implemented in the energy functional. The first work package of the project shall develop the new model including its finite-element representation with a dedicated program. The second will explore its application range, adding thereby additional abilities to the program such as geometric or material nonlinearity. The third work package is to scrutinize the substitute material models which we have developed and used within the above mentioned ESA project but not yet studied with scientific strictness. Within the fourth work package the models will be verified against detailed three-dimensional finite-element models and validated against measurements available in the literature. The material will enable us to compile all conclusions and recommendations regarding model power and limitations in the fifth work package. Numerically small yet mechanically sophisticated models for helical structures are so important because without them it is virtually impossible to perform automated design optimization for the structures of power or signal transfer cables. Apart from such economical and ecological aspects, the new models will be of academic interest as well as useful in other areas, including biomechanics, where helical structures must be studied. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2>
