Ecological evaluation and sustainable management of natural resources in thezones of shifting cultivation in Madagascar The purpose of the projects is to study the influence of slash and burn farming on the ecosystems of the Beforona region (Eastern cliff of Madagascar). The scientific fundamentals will be used to promote sustainable development of natural resources in a manner consistent with the needs of various users of the terroir . The approach is interdisciplinary and many types of cooperation will enable precise scientific data arrived at in the research to be placed in the context of the safeguarding of a balance between the development of human activities and the use of natural resources. The work as a whole can be divided into four complementary sections: 1. The first and most important is designed to quantify and describe the disturbances created by slash and burn farming and their consequences. Ecological measurements in the field comprise climatic and microclimatic observations, analyses of the water balance and erosion risks under different types of plant or crop cover, and studies of the evolution of the plant cover and soils. 2. The study of the situation at a specific level of development, such as the versant basin and the village terroir, is ensured by spatial analyses. These are conducted by aerial photography, site observations and enhancement using a geographical information system. 3. Understanding of the motivation and behaviour patterns of the players is arrived by additional socio-economic studies based on own surveys or existing studies by the various co-workers. 4. The transfer of knowledge for training and awareness-creation purposes is characterized, first and foremost, by support given to participating students and by a presentation of the methods and outcomes on various occasions and to various users (local players, decision-makers, development agencies). These goals fit in with a highly topical process of reflection in research, and indeed in Malagasy policy, i.e. the environmental and social problems created by bush fires. Another benefit stems from the location of the study zone, since the resulting conclusions should also contribute to the debate on the decentralization of natural resource management.
