New approaches for the efficient and accurate representation of the solvent in atomistic simulations Classical atomistic simulations of condensed-phase systems play an ever increasing role in physics, ~ nm), temporal chemistry and biology. Because they provide information at a level of spatial (0.1 ~ fs) and energetic (individual interatomic interactions)resolution that is impossible to achieve (1 experimentally, they represent nowadays an indispendable approach for the interpretation of experimental observations. However, finite computing power imposes in practice severe restrictions on the system sizes and time scales that can be accessed in these simulations, e.g. on the order of 10 nm and 100 ns nowadays with an explicit representation of the solvent molecules. The aim of the present project is the development of new algorithms (boundary conditions) for improving the efficiency of the solvent representation with a minimal loss of accuracy, mainly in the context of simulations concerning (macro-)molecules (e.g. biomolecules) in aqueous solution. Two approaches are proposed, to be used separately or in combination, and each planned as a sub-project for one Ph.D. student: solvent scaling and solvent switching. Solvent scaling relies on the progressive scaling of the dimensional and force-field parameters of the solvent molecule, within an explicit atomistic representation, as a function of the distance from the solute. The dimensional scaling is performed solvent molecules, while the in such a way that the first few solvation shells consist of Snormal ¸ T rest of the solvation range is covered solvent molecules, the decreased particle density largely reducing the comby increasingly Sfat ¸ T putational cost. The simultaneous scaling of the force-field parameters is constructed in such a way that the dispersive and dielectric solvation properties of the solvent, as well as its dielectric relaxation time, remain unaffected. As a result, the system size can be increased at constant computational cost, while maintaining an accurate representation of specific solvation effects as well as of the long-range solvation component. Solvent switching relies on a similar progressive transformation of the solvent model from an atomistic to a continuum representation as a function of the distance from the solute. The switching is performed in such a way that the first few solvation shells of the solute also consist of atomistic solvent molecules. The polarization of these molecules provides the interior boundary condition for an analytical continuum representation of the longrange solvation (spherical-armonics expansion of the electric potential). At longer distances from the solute, where finite-size or/and surface effects (droplet surface, box edges) might perturb the polarization of the explicitsolvent model, the continuum-electrostatics representation is used in turn to correct this polarization (feed-back mechanism). Finally, beyond this longer-distance range, the solvation forces on the explicit-solvent system are entirely accounted for by the continuum representation. The corresponding contribution to the energy and forces can be added as an analytical tail correction, appropriate for a formally infinite (i.e. macroscopic) system, thereby eliminating finite-size effects on the simulated system.
