A comprehensive examination of nitrogen cycling and microbial communities within soil microenvironments in integrated organic farming systems in Switzerland We aim to elucidate how conservation tillage and different cover crop types regulate overall N cycling, by altering N losses and availability in organic systems. We will use different approaches to reveal the role of microorganisms in N cycling across different scales. Description Recently, organic farming has been combined with conservation tillage in an attempt to tighten nutrient cycling and further install the sustainable use of resources (Mäder and Berner, 2012). Traditionally, organic farming employs tillage practices for weed control. This conventional method involves disking, plowing, and ancillary operations to prepare the seedbed and to incorporate crop residue left behind after harvest. Unfortunately, tillage, by its nature, severly alters soil structure, increases the potential of erosion, and decreases levels of soil organic matter. With respect to the nitrogen (N) cycle, conventional tillage promotes N losses by disrupting soil microenvironments that otherwise would protect and stabilize N in the soil (Kong et al., 2009). No-till or reduced tillage practices, on the other hand, can potentially promote the maintenance of soil microenvironments, which foster microbial community development and maintenance, and stabilization of N due to the lower degree of soil disturbance (Kong et al., 2009). Thus, in order to avoid the negative impacts of conventional tillage, less detrimental practices of soil preparation need to be further investigated for sustainable organic systems with improved N cycling. We will investigate alternative management practices for organic farms that forgo tillage intensity in favor of diverse cover crops as a weed control strategy. Fast-growing cover crops cover the soil rapidly and reduce weed abundance by competition for resources. Furthermore, cover crops generally enhance soil aggregation and microbial biomass plus activity (Kong et al., 2011). We will couple 3 different levels of tillage intensity (i.e., conventional, reduced and no-till) with both organic and conventional farming systems. Additionally, different types of fast-growing cover crops (leguminous, non-leguminous, mix of leguminous and non-leguminous and no cover crop) will be used as an approach for weed control and enhancing N cycling. Overall, managing N dynamics represents a challenge for organic cropping system. We aim to investigate the biophysical potential of combining different farming practices, tillage regimes and cover crops species to tighten the N cycle within the agricultural landscape. Materials and methods (SAFT), located at AgrosThe site for this research is the SSwiss ¸ Arable Farming Systems TrialT 8031S40TE). cope Reckenholz-Tänikon ART in Altwy near Zurich, Switzerland (42026S20TN; Established in 2009, SAFST fields (SAFST-I and SAFST-II) offer conventional and organic farming systems in combination with graduated tillage intensities (i.e., conventional tillage, reducedtillage and no-tillage) and different cover crop treatments. The cover crop species in this field study are Common vetch (Vicia sativa) and Hairy vetch (Vicia villosa) for the Leguminous treatment; White mustard (Sinapis alba) for the Non-leguminous treatment; and for the Mixed species treatment a variety of leguminous and non-leguminous plants were included such as phacelia, Persian clover, hairy vetch, buckwheat, and flax. A control treatment without cover crop is also included. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> Four soil cores (5.5 cm diameter) will be collected per subplot with depth increments of 0-6 cm and 6-20 cm. For each depth, the four cores will be combined in order to provide a representative sample of the plot. Field-moist soil will be wet-sieved for separation into fractions: Large macroaggregates, small macroaggregates, microaggregates, and silt and clay particles. We will then isolate the microaggregates, S+C and particulate organic matter fractions that compose the large and small macroaggregate fractions following the procedure developed by Six et al. (2000) and modified by Kong et al. (2010). We will quantify metabolic functional genes relevant to the nitrification and denitrification processes. We will perform real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) of ammonia monooxigenase (amoA), nitrite reductase genes (nirK and nirS) and nitrous oxide reductase gene (nosZ) according to Okano et al. (2004) and Henry et al. (2006). We will measure changes in total bacterial abundance within the bulk soil and soil microenvironments using real-time TaqMan qPCR targeting universal bacterial 16S rDNA gene (Suzuki et al. 2000, Okano et al. 2004). Nitrogen transformation rates will be assessed on soil samples collected from each sampling event. Gross mineralization and nitrification will be determined by 15N- isotope dilution using standard procedures (Powlson and Barraclough, 1993; Stark and Hart, 1996). Rate of nitrification will be calculated from the dilution of 15NO3- during the incubation period. Potential denitrification activity will be determined after an addition of a C source (glucose) and NO3-. Equipment used Leco CN628 Carbon and Nitrogen elemental analyzer Spectrophotometer, Vis V-1200, VWR International Preliminary results (with references to graphics that are uploaded in separate file) Preliminary results suggest that reduced tillage may promote the formation of large macroaggregates in organic systems, showing differences in soil aggregate dynamics. Lower proportions of small macroaggregates and microaggregates went to the assembly of large macroaggregates when a cover crop was present. Macroaggregates constitute the majority of soil volume and consequently contribute the most to overall carbon and nitrogen soil content. There is a trend of higher carbon content throughout soil fractions in organic tillage treatments with mixed and brassica cover crop treatments, although the differences are not significant, added effects may be seen with time. Overall, treatment effects are more pronounced in the 0-6cm soil layer. Discussion There is not sufficient data available at the moment. Relevant literature T ¸ Altieri, M. a., Lana, M. a., Bittencourt, H. V., Kieling, A. S., Comin, J. J., & Lovato, P. E. (2011). Enhancing Crop Productivity via Weed Suppression in Organic No-Till Cropping Systems in Santa Catarina, Brazil. Journal of Sustainable Agriculture, 35(8), 855U869. T ¸ Canali, S., Campanelli, G., Ciaccia, C., Leteo, F., Testani, E., & Montemurro, F. (2013). Conservation tillage strategy based on the roller crimper technology for weed control in Mediterranean vegetable organic cropping systems. European Journal of Agronomy, 50, 11U18. T ¸ Henry, S., Bru, D., Stres, B., Hallet, S., Philippot, L., 2006. Quantitative detection of the nosZ c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> gene, encoding nitrous oxide reductase, and comparison of the abundances of 16S rRNA, narG, nirK, and noZ genes in soils. Applied Environmental Microbiology 72, 5181-5189. T ¸ Kong, A. Y. Y., Fonte, S. J., van Kessel, C., & Six, J. (2009). Transitioning from standard to minimum tillage: Trade-offs between soil organic matter stabilization, nitrous oxide emissions, and N availability in irrigated cropping systems. Soil and Tillage Research, 104(2), 256U262. T ¸ Kong, A. Y. Y., Six, J., Bryant, D. C., Denison, R. F., & van Kessel, C. (2005). The Relationship between Carbon Input, Aggregation, and Soil Organic Carbon Stabilization in Sustainable Cropping Systems. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 69(4), 1078. T ¸ Kong, A. Y. Y., Fonte, S.J., van Kessel, C., Six, J., (2009). Transitioning from standard to minimum tillage: Trade-offs between soil organic matter stabilization, nitrous oxide emissions, and N availability in irrigated cropping systems. Soil Tillage Research 104, 256-262. T ¸ Kong, A.Y.Y., Hristova, K., Scow, K.M., Six, J. (2010) Impacts of different N management regimes on nitrifier and denitrifier communities and N cycling in soil microenvironments. Soil Biology and Biochemistry 42, 1523-1533. T ¸ Mäder, P., Berner, A. (2012). Development of reduced tillage systems in organic farming in Europe. Renewable Agriculture and Food Szstems 27, 7-11. T ¸ Okano, Y., Hristova, K.R., Leutenegger, C.M., Jackson, L.E., Denison R.F., Gebreyesus, B., Lebauer, D., Scow, K.M., 2004. Application of real-time PCR to study effects of ammonium on population size of ammonia-oxidizing bacteria in soil. Applied Environmental Microbiology 70, 1008-1016. T ¸ Powlson, D.S., Barraclough, D. (1993). Mineralization and assimilation in soil-plant systems. In: R. Knowles and T.H. Blackburn (eds.), Nitrogen Isotope Techniques. Academic Press Inc., San Diego, California. 209-242. T ¸ Pujol Pereira, E. I., Chung, H., Scow, K., & Six, J. (2013). Microbial Communities and Soil Structure are Affected by Reduced Precipitation, but Not by Elevated Carbon Dioxide. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 77(2), 482. T ¸ Six, J., Elliott, E. T., & Paustian, K. (2000). Soil macroaggregate turnover and microaggregate formation: A mechanism for C sequestration under no-tillage agriculture. Soil Biology and Bio chemistry, 32(
