Microwave Water Vapour Radiometer The main topic of this project is to measure the water vapor content in the troposphere. To obtain this quantity in terms of path delays and precipitable water vapor GGL is developing dedicated Hard- and software solutions in collaboration with with the private company CAPTEC, Biel, Switzerland. The state-of-the-art in GPS technology and other microwave based space techniques reveal that the obtained accuracy of the height is affected by refraction effects in the neutral (non-dispersive) part of the atmosphere usually referred to as troposphere. The water vapour content along the propagation path of the microwave signals affects the distances measured from the satellite to the receiver. The development of a transportable microwave water vapour radiometer system was the main objective of the first stage of this project. The equipment makes possible in-situ measurements of the path delay distribution and its temporal and spatial variations. With this information, the GPS microwave measurements can be corrected. This project is being carried out in cooperation with CAPTEC, Microwave Consulting Corp., Biel, the Universities of Bern, Göteborg, Nottingham, Montpellier, Thessaloniki, and Hania (GR), CNES, the Joint Center for Earth Sstems Technology, University of Maryland, the Fundamentalstation Wettzell of the German Bundesamt für Kartographie und Geodäsie, and the Radio Astronomy Observatory Hartebeesthoeck, South Africa. The instruments have been deployed in several international campaigns: Within the EU-project WAVEFRONT (WAter Vapor Experiment For Regional Network Trials)the observations enabled a feasibility study of the Global Positioning System (GPS) as a remote sensing tool for the determination of tropospheric water vapor. In this context the WVR's serve as an independent measurement technique for comparison and validation of GPS meteorology. In a dedicated observation campaign carried out in the Mt. Kilauea area on Big Island, Hawaii, the systems were deployed in order to provide a validation tool for other measurement techniques such as GPS meteorology, solar spectrometry, and radio soundings. In 2003 the system was operated in the framework of the EU project Gavdos at Kephalonia in Greece. Co-located measurements with the solar spectrometer GEMOSS from GGL were used as an independent validation tool to check the quality of the measurements of the Jason Microwave Radiometer JMR aboard the satellite Jason-1. This altimetric satellite scans the sea surface thus enabling a detailed mapping of the sea surface topography. The accuracy of the altimetric satellite measurements depends on the quality of the corrections provided by JMR. Therefore independent assessments of the performance of JMR is very important. Based on the good experiences gained during the 2003 campaign, the two instruments have been deployed 2005 again at the Island of Alonnisos in the Northern Aegean Sea at Patitiri which is close to the satellite subtrack. The two data sets showed an excellent coincidence thus confirming the high performance of the JMR. Further experiments are planned to gain information on the temporal stability of the JMR measurements. Between 2004 and 2006 the GGL microwave water vapor radiometer (WVR) has been deploy- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> ed in several additional field campaigns: 2004: Comparison campaign COMPA at Payerne (Switzerland) 2005: Jason-1 JMR Validation campaign GAVDOS at Patitiri, Island of Alonnisos (Greece), and calibration campaign at geo-fundamental station Wettzell, Germany. 2006: Participation within the VLBI-project CONT 05 at Hartebeesthoeck (South Africa). Presently the system is logging data at ETH Zurich. The long term data shall serve as additional data source for comparisons with future spectrometric and GNSS derived path delays.
