Simultaneous Embeddings We use the term simultaneous (geometric) embedding to refer to any kind of problem in which two or more graphs are to be embedded simultaneously, usually subject to certain constraints. One reason for the strong interest in simultaneous embeddings lies in a wealth of applications. We use the term simultaneous (geometric) embedding to refer to any kind of problem in which two or more graphs are to be embedded simultaneously, usually subject to certain constraints. One reason for the strong interest in simultaneous embeddings lies in a wealth of applications in areas such as bio-informatics, network analysis, and software engineering. For instance, in order to compare two phylogenetic trees one would like to have a nice simultaneous drawing of two trees sharing the same set of leaves, so-called tanglegrams. More generally, simultaneous embeddings come into play whenever large or dynamically changing graphs are to be visualized. Given a large graph, only part of it can be shown at a time with a sufficient level of detail. When browsing from one such part to a neighboring one, it is desirable to have a certain overlap that is common to both parts and drawn the same way for both parts. In this way, the user can maintain her mental map and more easily keep track of her current location in the graph. In the context of dynamic graphs, a simultaneous drawing for several instances of the graph at different timesteps allows to visually examine the differences in order to, for instance, draw conclusions regarding the capacity utilization of a network. Beyond these motivating applications the study of simultaneous embeddings revealed a rich collection of interesting and challenging combinatorial and algorithmic problems, many of which are still far from being solved. The goal of this project is, on one hand, to gain more insights into some of these problems and, on the other hand, to develop new models in order to address some shortcomings of the existing settings studied so far. The project will be carried out as an international collaboration within the collaborative research project GraDr: Graph Drawings and Representations , which comprises altogether 12 partners from seven European countries.
