RoboEarth RoboEarth is a World Wide Web for robots: a giant data repository where robots can share information and learn from each other about their behavior and their environment. Today's robots continue to be overwhelmed by the nuanced and complicated nature of human environments. To date, the vast majority of academic and industrial efforts have tackled these challenges by increasing the performance and functionality of individual robot systems. However, in a trend mirroring the developments of the early PC industry, recent years have seen first successful examples of augmenting the computational power of individual robot systems with the shared memory of multiple robots. Sharing knowledge between robots requires methods to effectively encode, exchange, and reuse data. RoboEarth is an open source, world-wide-web-style database for sharing knowledge between robots. The goal of this project is a proof-of-concept that (1) RoboEarth greatly speeds up robot learning and adaptation in complex tasks, and that (2) robots using RoboEarth can execute tasks that were not explicitly planned for at design time. RoboEarth stores a global world model, including reusable information on objects (e.g., images, point clouds, models), environments (e.g., maps, object locations) and actions (e.g., behaviors, motion primitives) linked to semantic information (e.g., properties, classes). RoboEarth's databases and database services are accessible via common web interfaces (see Graphic 1). The repeated performance of robot actions on robot platforms with varying similarity offers many opportunities to improve the reliability and performance of action execution. A learning component allows users to provide feedback on a robot's task performance. For example, if the robot uses an unsuitable grip position to grasp a cup, the learning component allows a human to provide feedback and improve the robot's grasp performance. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> In addition, action execution can be improved based on the experiences of other robots stored in the RoboEarth database as well as a robot's own experiences. This allows the learning component to leverage the strategies and models of robot actions with data-based approaches, e.g., by calculating feed-forward corrections to robot motion primitives. For example, the learning component allows a robot to access and integrate the experience of other, similar robots grasping similar cups into its corresponding grasp skill, or to perform parts of a well-known trajectory in open-loop control to compensate for slow sensor feedback. For more information on current events, please have a look at the RoboEarth Blog at: http://www.roboearth.org/blo
