The Development of a Fluorescence Optode Selective for Orthophosphate (H2PO4- and HPO42-) and, Alternatively, for Nitrate and Nitrite A sensor selective to inorganic orthophosphate is developed from scratch. The development is preferably focused on an optical fluorescent sensor. After developing a phosphateselective ionophore, the industrial partner was primarily interested in optimizing membranes for potentiometry. Almost all methods assaying inorganic phosphate go back to the method by Fiske-Subbarow introduced in 1925 (Fiske and Subbarow 1925): The method relies on the formation of a polyoxometalate complex (Katsoulis 1998) between inorganic phosphate and molybdenum(VI)oxide salts. If inorganic phosphate has to be discriminated from organically bound P, the specimen is pretreated with trichloroacetic acid (Zilversmith and Davis 1950). Phosphorus is an essential nutrient for all plants and is supplied as a fertilizer in agriculture. If phosphorus is transported from the terrestrial to the aquatic ecosystem, the consequence is the eutrophication of lakes and coastal water. Therefore the concentration of this element in water running off from sewage works is strictly controlled. In Switzerland such water samples must contain <0.8 mgP/L (26 umol/L phosphate). Ideally a method to determine inorganic phosphate in water samples should be highly sensitive, mobile, reliable and, for continuous monitoring, a probe should react reversibly. Ideally, chemical sensors combine these properties and show, therefore, a high economic potential. However, the preconditions to develop a sensor system are to have access to an ionophore which complexes phosphate effectively and reversibly and is stable in contact with water over weeks. The project involved a search for the most promising ionophores, to modify the ionophores synthetically in order to get the required features, to incorporate the ionophores into polymer films along with other compounds such as plasticizers and additives, and to prepare ion-selective electrodes (ISEs) and optodes. The relevant analytical parameters of the sensors were investigated in a stepwise screening process. Finally, the industrial partner decided to focus primarily on the development of ion-selective electrodes. The development is ongoing.
