PRISM-MODE: Accretionary PRISM numerical MODeling Experiments to investigate origin and evolution of forearc basins and its influence on subduction zone dynamics: A PhD research project integrating 3D-seismic and Ocean Drilling boreho- le data with numerical simulations to explore the Nankai accretionary wedge, offshore Japan Motivation and Background: Subduction zones are the EarthSs principle loci for earthquakes and tsunamis. Even given that the modern era of earthquake measurement is too short to fully capture the statistical characteristics of earthquake dynamics, there is clear evidence that energy release from subduction earthquakes is affected by the nature of the fault and by the structure of the bounding plates. Thus, one missing component in understanding subduction earthquakes may be the role played by the structure of the overlying plate, as suggested by a statistical correlation between seismic asperities and the existence of forearc sedimentary basins overlying the inner wedge of accretionary prisms. Theoretical considerations suggest that sedimentation in these basins plays an important role in redistributing stress and deformation in the wedge. Resulting hypotheses that link sedimentation, basin architecture and deformation of the wedge to the seismic coupling of the subduction thrust, however, have not yet had a serious test by comparison with geophysical and borehole data. Objectives: It is the main goal of this PhD research project to test these hypotheses through direct comparison of numerical simulations of accretionary prism and forearc basin development with results from an ongoing Integrated Ocean Drilling Program (IODP) project in the Nankai Trough, offshore Japan, which will sample and characterize, for the first time, the deep interior of an accretionary wedge. Drilling for this project will be conducted in 2012 and 2013. Among the primary subjects under investigation will be the influence of sedimentation, deformation and structure of the upper plate on the long term development and mechanical state of the Nankai subduction thrust system. This fault system hosts M 8+ earthquakes on 100-200 years timescales. Approach: To accomplish the proposed integrative research, we will incorporate results from 3D-seismic data interpretation and boreholes from the ongoing IODP SNankai-Trough-Seismogenic-Zone¸ project in numerical experiments using a thermo-mechanical, finite element model ExperimentT for rock deformation, heat flow, and sedimentation. Through this process, we will provide new data and insights to constrain periods of observed mechanical wedge stability, relationships between faulting and sedimentation, the long-term evolution of the forearc system and inferences on the behavior of seismic asperities. By linking different scales of observation ranging from core scale in IODP boreholes to margin-wide aspects addressed in the numerical modeling experiments, this study is expected to advance the frontiers of our understanding of nature and evolution of convergent plate tectonic settings with consequences regarding earthquake and tsunami hazard aspects.
