Efficient Technologies and Systems for Mobility - Minimization of vehicular energy demand through Commingling and hybridization of thermoplastic composites Novel yarn technologies have the potential to facilitate the direct consolidation of of fibre-reinforced thermoplastic composites. Commingled and hybridized yarns are investigated with regards to short-cycle, high-volume mass production techniques such as stamp forming. This project is part of the SCCER Mobility and falls within the scope of Capacity Area A3. The SCCER Mobility aims at developing the knowledge and technologies essential for the transition of the current fossil fuel based transportation system to a sustainable one, featuring minimal CO2-output and Primary Energy Demand as well as virtually zero-pollutant emissions. Capacity Area A3 concentrates its research on vehicle technologies for minimization of the energy demand excluding the powertrain itself. This includes new routes to high volume lightweight thermoplastics and bioinspired composites. The functional integration of thermal insulation into composites and thermal management of vehicles as a whole will allow further reducing the nonpropulsive energy demand. --------------------------------------------­ The specific goal of this project within the SCCER CA3 is to develop improved hybrid yarn materials and to optimize processing parameters for geometrically complex components. In particular, we look at various types of commingled yarns, hybrid yarns, and postpreg systems consisting of reinforcement fibers and thermoplastic materials and their amenability to rapid stamp forming. Stamp forming thermoplastics is one of the most promising processes techniques in the automotive manufacturing because of short cycle times. In stamp forming the processing time can potentially c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> be reduced to under a minute in processes where the fibre and matrix materials are already well mingled. Short cycle times are particularly important in mass production processes such as those found in the average consumer automobile manufacturing industry where a minimum of 100,000 units per year are expected to be produced. As a technique taken from metal sheet processing, stamp forming is already applied and well supported in the automotive industry. However the degrees of mingling found in the intermediate materials available today are not adequate for rapid stamp forming. These materials include hybrid yarns made using commingling, parallel winding, stretch breaking, and schappe processes. While these intermediate materials do result in high quality components under compression moulding, stamp forming occurs at much shorter time scales. As a result, complete fiber wetting, void elimination, homogenous fiber/matrix distribution and complete consolidation are still a challenge. This work aims to compare hybrid materials from various manufacturers and to determine the optimum processing windows and conditions for the production of high quality geometrically complex components. If possible, new hybrid intermediate materials and processing methods therefor are to be developed. The consolidated materials will be mechanically tested and microscopically analyzed for voids and failure behaviour. This work builds on previous work from the Laboratory of Composite Materials and Adaptive structures. Figure 1 shows an optical micrograph of the cross-sectional area of sample of hybrid yarn. Thomman, Urs (2003). Direct Stamp Forming of Non-Consolidated Carbon/Thermoplastic Fibre Commingled Yarns Ph.D, ETH Zurich, Switzerland.
