Flood Scapes. Contemporary Landscape Strategies in Times of Climate Change. The Flood Scapes project investigates the strategies of spatial adaptation to flood risk applied by contemporary landscape designers, and aims at developing further the design tools, methods, and concepts needed to protect and value up our living environment in times of climate change Many European cities have in the recent past been exposed to various natural hazards, flood being the most current and costly. Under the combined influence of urban growth and increase in extremes due to climate change, these disasters could become more frequent and more devastating in the coming decades, and our cultural representation of nature will probably evolve drastically with our growing exposure to such natural hazards. Water claims more space, and water management is evolving from a long-reserved technical domain towards a wider territorial issue involving cultural, economic, and ecological dimensions, one which calls for interdisciplinary answers. In this new and still evolving context, landscape architecture is becoming a key discipline, since spatial approaches are needed to find sustainable answers to flood risks. This research project aims at developing further the design tools, methods, and concepts needed to protect and value up our living environment in times of climate change. First, we will investigate the current strategies of spatial adaptation to flood risk as applied by contemporary landscape designers throughout Europe. Based on this first analytical approach, we will conduct a Sresearch ¸ by designT investigation at both ends of the flood problematic: Alpine valleys and river deltas. The investigation will eventually lead to a conceptual reflection on contemporary designersS positions on nature and flood risk, and develop the tools, methods, and concepts needed for the strategic choices that will have to be made to address flood risks simultaneously with developmental needs, in order to keep Swiss and other European cities both safe and attractive.
