Growth-dependent tree mortality processes Long-term dendrochronological time series contain valuable information that can be used to evaluate and refine mathematical models of vegetation dynamics. Tree mortality processes are crucial elements of population dynamics, and are vital for the process of evolutionary selection. The main objective of this dissertation project is to increase our understanding of mortality processes in subalpine forests by developing tree mortality functions based on measured growth patterns using dendrochronological techniques. The focus of this project is on long-term growth-dependent mortality processes at the individual tree level. Trees are in general affected by interactions of several long- and short-term stresses, which accumulate and predispose the tree to die. In a first step, logistic regression models were used to discriminate between dead and living spruce trees from three regions in the Swiss Alps, based on current growth patterns (growth levels and growth trends). Using various fitting and validation methods, 80-90% of the sampled trees could be classified correctly as being dead or alive. In a second step, we attempt to predict the point in time of individual tree mortality. Again, logistic regression models are fitted, here with time-varying growth variables as input, and are applied to time series of individual trees. The derived semi-mechanistic models have to be optimized, in order to predict the point in time of tree death as precisely as possible. The resulting deterministic tree mortality models will be mainly based on tree ring data. Finally, the increased understanding of mortality processes and delay effects in mortality of trees shall be used to improve the formulation of the mortality submodel in forest succession models. A close collaboration with the group of Prof. Dr. F. H. Schweingruber (Swiss Federal Research Institute, http://www.wsl.ch/welcome-en.ehtmlWSL\rh) provides the dendrochronological background for the project. Project status: started 1 Dec 1999, ongoing.
