Computational Magneto-Hydrodynamics with Discrete Differential Forms Discrete differential forms will be investigated as a structure preserving way to discretize the equations of magneto-hydrodynamics. The equations of compressible magneto-hydrodynamics (MHD) provide a consistent description of the interaction of conducting fluids like plasmas with electromagnetic fields. The basic models comprise balance equations for mass, momentum and energy together with material laws and the magneto-quasistatic MaxwellSs equations for the electromagnetic fields. For the case of resistive MHD, which will be in the focus of this project, we confront evolution equations of mixed hyperbolic-parabolic type. They preserve the zero divergence constraint for the magnetic induction and solutions display both infinite speeds of propagation and the emergence of shocks. In this project we aim to develop and examine a new approach to the discretization of resistive MHD evolutions. We plan to rely on finite element exterior calculus (FEEC) for the approximation of the electromagnetic fields, whereas advanced finite volume methods will be used to deal with the balance laws for the fluid. FEEC is firmly established in computational electromagnetics in the form of Galerkin discretization by means of edge elements. It enjoys remarkable structure preserving properties that, for instance, automatically ensure (weak) divergence constraints on the discrete fields. Nevertheless, the potential of FEEC has not been explored in MHD. The two different spatial discretizations for fluid and electromagnetic quantities will be tightly coupled through joint balance equations for energy and momentum. Moreover, the fluid velocity will give rise to advective terms in the magneto-quasi-static Maxwell equations. Stabilized Galerkin methods have to be used for their discretization and will have to be adapted to discontinuous velocity fields. Timestepping will rely on combined implicit-explicit Runge-Kutta timestepping using fast iterative solvers for magnetic diffusion. We expect the new methods to possess excellent structure preserving properties, which may translate into superior accuracy and stability compared to conventional finite volume methods for MHD.
