Smartgrid-Polysun: Design Tool for Local Load Management Integration of demand response, Distributed Generation (DG) and Energy Storage (ES) into Polysun. Models for loads, DG and ES will be developed and the operation of individual buildings will be optimized, while regional control concepts and the additional power system flexibility will be assessed. aims at the integraThe project SSmartgrid-Polysun: ¸ Design Tool for Local Load ManagementT tion of load management, Distributed Generation (DG) and energy storage into the commercial software tool Polysun. On the household level, the existing models for TCLs, DG and batteries will be improved and complemented by stochastic load profiles. Optimization techniques are used for operation strategies of individual buildings. On the regional level, control concepts will be investigated for aggregations of such buildings and the additional flexibility for the power system will be assessed. Project partners: PSL - ETH, Vela Solaris AG. Potenital contacts: Minergie, mivune AG (graphical user interfaces for home energy systems), Landis + Gyr (SmartMetering manufacturer of systems and radio control equipment), swissgrid (TSO Switzerland). The individual work packages are described. 1. Integration of load management and local optimization of energy supply and production in the existing tool Polysun. 2. Calculation and visualization of the energy supply and production of the building with a focus on the electric load profile in a short time frame (minute range). 3. Development of control concepts for coordination of components with well insulated thermal mass (e.g. hot water tanks, cooling equipment) with the new highly fluctuating renewable energy sources (PV, wind). In subsequent steps, heat storage, electricity-generating heating (combined heat and power) and cooling systems are examined. 4. A methodology for assessing the additional flexibility for the power supply will be developed and implemented. 5. Together with the mathematical models of the considered units and the load profile simulation, optimization methods are applied to the consumption and production behavior of the building. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> 6. The effectiveness of variable electricity tariffs and tariffs for renewable energies are evaluated according to the simulation of realistic scenarios. This and other incentive systems and technical solutions will be developed and examined (e.g. external control pulses through load management aggregator) and specific proposals will be made for network operators. 7. The Inside Polysun software interface is expanded so that it allows access to the new models by the calling software.
