MiRoR MiRoR (Miniaturised Robotic systems for holistic in-situ Repair and maintenance works in restrained and hazardous environments) aims to develop a fundamentally novel concept of a Miniaturised Robotic Machine (Mini-RoboMach) system. MiRoR (Miniaturised Robotic systems for holistic in-situ Repair and maintenance works in restrained and hazardous environments) aims to develop a fundamentally novel concept of a Miniaturised Robotic Machine (Mini-RoboMach) system, that equipped with intelligence-driven and autonomous abilities, will be demonstrated for holistic in-situ repair and maintenance of large and/or intricate installations. MiRoR (Miniaturised Robotic systems for holistic in-situ Repair and maintenance works in restrained and hazardous environments) aims to develop a novel concept of a Miniaturised Robotic Machine (Mini-RoboMach) system that will be demonstrated for holistic in-situ repair and maintenance of large and intricate installations. This will be done via the following research steps: 1. Develop a novel concept of Mini-RoboMach, with unique complementary miniature systems: for providing both Swalking and 6-axis processing capability; T ¸ novel Sfree-leg ¸ hexapodT ¸ T and 6-axis light proT ¸ an original stiffness-controlled flexible-arm robot for enabling Ssnaking ¸ T cessing ability The complementarily means that a hybrid configuration of Mini-RoboMach, i.e. Swalk ¸ & snake can be utilised. inT 2. Develop MiRoR intelligent controller with the following key abilities: T ¸ Self-positioning: enable walk and/or snake navigations to/from work and calibration of endeffectors on required features; T ¸ Reasoning: decide on methods of accessing the working area while learning from these experiences T ¸ Planning: schedule task successions and optimise Mini-RoboMach path in reference to intervention on different places. T ¸ Adaptation: modify the parameters of treatment procedures for developing a self-protection ability of Mini-RoboMach. 3. Develop a unique virtual test bench for the hardware (e.g. Mini-RoboMach) and software (intelligent controller) of MiRoR so that its robustness and capability can be pre-assessed and corrected before its effective utilisation. This will be the task of ICVR at ETH Zurich. 4. Demonstrate MiRoR by performing in-situ holistic repair/maintenance works on high investment, large and/or intricate industrial such as (power plants, aero-engines, construction/infrastructure, offshore platforms, etc). c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2>
