AHEAD - Advanced Hybrid Electric Autobus Design This project aims at improving efficiency, lifetime and cost of a new generation of hybrid electric public transit busses of Carrosserie Hess AG. Using systematic, model based optimization techniques the optimal component sizing is found and the optimal control strategy is developed. This project is a cooperation of HESS AG (Bellach, Solothurn) and ETH Zürich. It is sponsored by KTI. This project was awarded with the Hans Eggenberger Preis 2010, and it won the second prize in the European Satellite Navigation Competition. This project aims at improving efficiency, lifetime and cost of a new generation of hybrid electric public transit busses of Carrosserie Hess AG. Using systematic, model based optimization techniques the optimal component sizing is found and the optimal control strategy is developed. Fundamentals: Hybrid Electric Vehicles (HEVs) are a promising approach to reduce fuel consumption and carbondioxide emissions. One challenging task in the implementation of such a system is the energy management problem. Since HEVs have an additional degree of freedom, there is the need of an appropriate control system, which is dedicated to defining the power split between the various powertrain components. In literature this task is often referred to as the supervisory control problem. Both for the application in real-time, but also for design studies the energy management plays an important role, since the supervisory control strongly influences efficiency and therefore fuel consumption of the vehicle. First, a mathematical model of the vehicle is developed and validated using measurements that were collected on a real bus in service. The data recorded contains speed, velocity and altitude profile, number of passengers, power flows inside the powertrain etc. With this data at hand it is possible to parametrize the model such that reality is reflected and extrapolation from the data is possible. Secondly, optimal control theory is applied in order to find the optimal control input to the system. In the case of a design study a non-causal strategy can be used. Here dynamic programming is implemented in order to find the global optimal control input, which yields the minimal consumption of a specific vehicle configuration on a specific driving profile. This value serves as a benchmark to compare different configurations among each other. With this framework, the best configuration for the specific service route can be found. Results show a fuel saving potential versus a similar conventional vehicle of up to 16% in urban surroundings. Further, if the buffer system onboard consists of electric double layer capacitors instead of nickel-metal-hydride batteries, fuel consumption can be lowered by 2-4%. Thirdly, a control system for real-time application will be developed. Since the service route of the bus and the time schedule is known in advance, this information can be used for control. The goal is to develop a predictive control scheme for the bus, which relies on the information at hand. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> So far a heuristic and a stochastic optimal control strategy have been tested in extended simulations. It was shown that it is possible to achieve close-to-optimal fuel consumption (<+5% excess consumption) with these, very simple controllers. In a next phase these controllers will be implemented on the real system.
