Scenarios for Sustainable Development of the Built Environment in Switzerland 2005-2030 (NFP 54) Based on the collaboration in the ESPON 3.2 scenario project, this NFP 54 projects aims at elaborating transdisciplinary and implementation oriented scenarios for the built environment in Switzerland until 2030. The result for implementation will be sustainabilityoriented policy recommendations. Scenarios for Sustainable Development of the Built Environment in Switzerland (2005-2030) Objectives Spatial development patterns in Switzerland and future development trends and infrastructure requirements are not only the result of policy and planning decisions at Swiss federal and cantonal levels but are also considerably influenced by overall development structures in Middle Europe. Both the effects of the enlargement of the European Union as well as the European strategies for territorial development will have considerable direct and indirect impacts on Swiss territory. The driving forces and influence of the EUSs spatial development will require a response and/or adaptation of Swiss policies on sustainable development and spatial planning. The objective of the project is to build transdisciplinary and implementation oriented scenarios that address the following research questions (amongst others): T ¸ What kind of impact will the spatial development of the EU have on the Swiss built environment? T ¸ Which significance will future transportation needs, especially interregional / inter-European have for the Swiss infrastructure (railways, airports, highways)? T ¸ How does the Swiss system of urban agglomerations fit into a polycentric Europe of the future? T ¸ Will the Swiss agglomerations continue to sprawl, taking demographic and economic development into account? What does this mean for human behaviour in space (for example, commuting and land consumption)? What will be the meaning for infrastructure need and maintenance (e.g. costs)? T ¸ How can the Swiss built environment, taking both exogenous and endogenous impacts into account, develop in a sustainable manner? T ¸ Which means should be taken and how can they be implemented through existing, improved or new instruments (policies, strategies, concepts and plans)? In order to find answers to these questions, scenarios be worked out that will examine the future of sustainable development of the built environment in Switzerland within the European context. Concept The project will develop prospective and proactive scenarios focusing on the built environment in Switzerland, relaying on the methodology adopted by the European Observatory Network (ESPON) (ESPON 3.2) project and adapt it on the Swiss as part of its SSpatial ¸ scenarios and orientationsT context. These scenarios will be based on an analysis of driving forces, trend projections and simulations. Initially, thematic scenarios will be designed around the broad themes of (1) demography, (2) economy and tourism, (3) energy, (4) socio-cultural issues, (5) transportation and mobility, and natural and cultural heritage, climate change, rural areas, taking existing sce(6) environment U c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> narios for Switzerland into account. The thematic scenarios of our project will be integrated and synthesized into a set of comprehensive prospective scenarios according to a common scenario baseline. Based on that, proactive scenarios will be developed, which explore how specific policy interventions can influence the prospective scenarios to achieve specific policy goals. In order to communicate the scenarios to a wider audience, all of the scenarios will be visualized using models, statistics, and maps. The project also provides for a doctoral thesis at ETHZ, mainly concentrating on an innovative methodology of scenario building, combining a modelling and a design approach (Jolanda Hofschreuder). A post-doctoral researcher at ETHZ (Duncan Cavens) will develop and deliver an innovative agent-based simulation approach and accompanying visualisations. Expected Results The core of the research plan is the elaboration and integration of prospective thematic and prospective policy scenarios with a time horizon until 2030. The result for implementation will be tangible sustainability-oriented policy recommendations for decision-makers and authorities in spatial planning. The scenarios and the innovative recommendations resulting there from shall be used as scientific base for the revision of the Swiss Guidelines for Spatial Development, for the revision of the national policy on agglomerations and on regions, for the revision of cantonal structure planning, municipal zoning planning, sectoral plans and concepts (Sachpläne und Konzepte) of the Confederation, the concretion of the Strategy for Sustainable Development of the Swiss Federal Council, and possibly forthcoming planning tools for agglomerations or functional regions. Most important outcomes: December 2005: Milestone: First Interim Report (scenario baseline) September 2006: Milestone: Second Interim Report (prospective scenarios) October 2007: Milestone: Draft Final Report (proactive scenarios, recommendations) June 2008: Milestone: Final Report Networking Since the future development of settlements and infrastructures in Switzerland depends on overall spatial development trends in Europe, ETHZ-IRL and EPFL-Chôros are participating in the ESPON 3.2 project. This project elaborates the knowledge of future spatial development trends in Europe. Our NRP54 project intends to work in parallel and in close collaboration with ESPON 3.2, following the same research methodology while highlighting the Swiss context At the level of Switzerland, our project will closely co-operate with any other relevant research projects / institutions, most of all with the partner NRP54 project SDegree ¸ of urban sprawl in (PD Dr. F. Switzerland: Quantitative analysis 1940-2002 and implications for regional planningT Kienast, WSL, Birmensdorf). Case Study Area(s) The scope of the project is the whole of Switzerland. In order to specify scenarios and recommendations, several types of regions will be emphasized on. Contact c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> keiner@nsl.ethz.ch
