PIO-03 11-2 Large Microphone Array Humans are able, to a certain extent, to determine the location of a sound source and to use this information to focus on a person speech while ignoring the ambient noise. Similarly, microphones arrays enable to locate sounds and filter them depending of their incoming direction. Humans are able, to a certain extent, to determine the location of a sound source and to use this information to focus on a person speech while ignoring the ambient noise. Similarly, microphones arrays enable to locate sounds and filter them depending of their incoming direction. Unlike light, that propagates too fast to record travel times easily, time difference of arrival (TDOA) of a same sound recorded by two different microphones can be computed directly and used to detect the origin of a sound.Though microphone arrays are known since the 20s for military applications (aircraft detection, artillery localization), the tremendous increase in computational power as well as the miniaturization of microphones have opened new theories and algorithms U and new areprecise sound source localization through deconvolution, ambient noise filtering U as of uses: sound filtering in telecommunications (laptops, smart-phones), industrial applications (optimization of airplanes design to reduce noise emission). Meanwhile, widely spread arrays are nowadays limited to 2, 3 or 4 microphones and are unable to deal with complex situations like multiple speakers, room reverberation or diffraction due to large wavelength of audible sound waves. In this project, a microphone array with a large number of elements has been built together with a fast middleware architecture that is able to record and stream sounds from 64 sources with low latency. Together with a standard optical camera, the array is able to compute an acoustic image of a scene and to superpose it with the optical image, in real-time. Microphone arrays can not only localize sound sources but also amplify selectively one source and cancel out the others. The sound quality can be dramatically improved compared to single microphone recordings. This type of processing can be used to design smart hearing aids that automatically amplify an interesting sound source, for example the voice of your interlocutor, without amplifying background noise.
