Morphology of steep mountains streams The intensification of landuse in mountain basins in the past decades and the resulting impacts on headwater streams and on downstream river networks have led to a growing interest in channel process and form in mountain streams. One of the common expressions of channel form in steep mountain streams is the step-pool morphology, a fairly regular but dynamic stair-like arrangement of bed sediment along the channel. This project investigates the step-pool geometry of a steep mountain stream. We have three main objectives in this study. First we propose a new approach for the statistical analysis of the step-pool structure as a system of superposed step-pool sequences, each created by a different formative flood event. This approach leads to a different way of computing step length, which we compare with the traditional method. Second, we investigate the relations between the mean step height and length of the superposed sequences and look for a basic geometrical scaling between them. Third, we explore the variability in individual step properties and their relation (or lack thereof) to channel bed slope and sediment size. We apply and test the approach of superposed step-pool sequences on data collected for that purpose from the Vogelbach, a mountain stream in central Switzerland. This stream was chosen for two reasons. First, because it is a very steep stream on the border between a cascading and step-pool channel. Due to the large grain size and steep channel, pools with reverse slope do not occur between all steps. There are very few datasets of step-pool morphologies in such steep streams reported in the literature (the average channel bed slope in the Vogelbach is 0.18 m/m). Second, because it allows for a continuous analysis of steps and pools without having to divide the stream into subreaches. In contrast to previous studies, we define an average channel bed slope for every step by looking at the slope of the channel section centred at the step. This allows us to statistically analyse relations between individual step properties in addition to step-pool sequences. The practical aspect of this study relates to the design of check dams, which are frequently constructed in steep mountain streams in Switzerland for the purpose of erosion control. The design of these structures commonly follows very simple empirical formulae for the establishment of an equivalent stable slope and leads to a constructed spacing between dams. The structures are very similar in nature to the natural step-pool sequences, and we hope that understanding the morphology and geometry of these natural sequences will help in illustrating why the constructed ones succeed or fail in their erosion control purpose.
