VisuLands - Visualization Tools for Public Participation in the Management of Landscape Change The VisuLands project is addressing the potentials of computer based landscape visualization methods and investigating, how far these media contribute to the understanding of landscape issues and which role interactivity takes in participatory planning processes. Schroth, O., Wissen, U., Schmid, W.A. Visualization Tools for Public Participation in the Management of Landscape Change VisuLands U 1. VisuLands Research Project Participation as means of cooperative planning has been a key issue since the 1960s, because it is supporting the legitimation of the planning process. In addition, the inclusion of local knowledge and local needs is enhancing the quality of planning decisions. Above all, the chances for implementation are getting better the more accepted the decisions are. The quality of participative planning processes depends on a number of factors: What is the planning task, who is participating and how are information, cooperation and decision making organised (Selle 2000)? The choice of adequate means of communication can facilitate the comprehensibility and transparency of planning decisions. In this context, the EU project VisuLands analyses the potentials of 3D landscape visualizations for participation in the management of landscape change. A crucial part of the analysis focusses on the relation between the visual quality of landscapes and their ecological, socio-economic and cultural functions. In addition, the VisuLands project has the following objectives: Evaluation of visualization tools with regard to their benefits for the communication of planU ning decisions in landscape management Development of visualization tools for the assessment of scenarios of landscape development U Identification of quantitative indicators for the assessment of landscape functions U Development of landscape preference models U Exploitation of results for outreach materials U 2. Work flow of 3D Landscape Visualization If visualizations are supposed to facilitate the planning process, they will need a close integration into the process. For the VisuLands project, 3D visualizations are used as part of the scenario method in order to support analyses, identification of planning objectives and the writing and assessment of alternative scenarios. These alternative scenarios are linked with non-visual indicators. Changes that come up during the participation, are incorporated in the visualizations and the next planning step. Through this iterative testing, the visualization tools are adjusted to the needs of the end-users (fig.1). c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> Fig. 1: Work flow of scenario visualization as iterative process (VisuLands 2004) The visualization work flow is shown in figure one on the left side (D3D Visualizations: Visual QualitiesS). ¸ Each 3D landscape model is based on a digital terrain model (DTM) which represents the topography. Orthophotos and satellite images are projected onto the DTM as geotextures (so called Ddraping S). ¸ Then, built objects and vegetation are inserted. The visualizations may incorporate various additional data, e.g. environmental conditions, prognostic data etc. If the software supports geodata formats, the 3D objects are assigned to area, line and point vectors. In that way, houses may be set with regard to cadastral data. For the representation of vegetation, it is possible to calculate algorithms that represent a natural distribution of plants with regard to vegetation maps. 3. Case Study Site Entlebuch UNESCO Biosphere Reserve In the VisuLands project, 3D computer models are produced for various European regions in order to assess the tools together with local stakeholders. The Entlebuch UNESCO Biosphere Reserve (UBE) has been chosen as case study site for Switzerland, because diverse demands on the landscape superpose there. These issues are transferable to other European regions as well. In addition, the local community of the Entlebuch is already involved in a sophisticated participation process, so that the visualization tools can be applied in established panels and workshops. The Entlebuch region is located in the main valley between Lucerne and Bern and it is famous for its cultural landscape of (inter-)national significance. The diverse, agricultural landscape contains important habitats for plants and animals, e.g. karst areas, forests and unique moorlands. The areas with national protection cover more than half of the Entlebuch altogether. Fig. 2: Mown fenlands and adjacent raised bogs DGross GfälS ¸ of the Federal moorland inventory (Photo: Jürg Egli) Fig. 3: Moorland Habkern/Sörenberg: Pastures with single raised bogs in the background (Photo: Jürg Egli) It is of special importance that the inhabitants of the region decided on the application of their region as UNESCO Biosphere Reserve on their own. In a participative procedure, they compiled a basic strategy and the inhabitants of all eight municipalities voted in favour of it. Only one year later, the Entlebuch was designated as first Biosphere Reserve according to the so-called Sevillastrategy (Ruoss et al. 2002). Fig. 4: Escholzmatt, tenements at the village border and traditional village center with church (photo: Jürg Egli) 4. 3D Visualizations as Media in Moderated Workshops c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> Up to now, seven workshops on settlement patterns, tourism, forest management plan and the future of local agriculture have taken place. They have been facilitated by moderators from the Biosphere management and took place locally. The 3D visualizations were integrated into the moderation and the VisuLands team presented them on demand of the moderator or participants. To analyse the impact of the visualizations in an explorative manner, participant observations, group discussions and in-depth interviews have been conducted. Fig. 5: Application of 3D visualizations in a moderated workshop on the development of tourism in the Entlebuch UNESCO Biosphere Reserve (VisuLands 2004) 4.1 Settlement Patterns Sörenberg, a village in the South of the UNESCO Biosphere, has been shaped by tourism. From the 1950s on, spacious areas of chalets were built around the former spa, and they are still determine the character of the village (Bossart 1995). The historic development of the village has been visualised in a three-dimensional landscape model, through which the user may navigate in realtime, choosing between three points of time, 1910, 1950 and 2003 (fig. 6). Fig. 6: Settlement patterns of Sörenberg in the years 1910, 1950 and 2003; screenshots from realtime 3D model (VisuLands 2004, l'Geodaten: GIS-Koordinationsstelle, Kanton Luzern) From an economic point of view, the development of the local hotel business is desired. In addition, there are still interests in building new chalets, although the areas for settlements are very limited. In this context, computer-based visualization tools are likely to support the impact assessment of future settlement patterns. Although 3D visualizations have become a common tool in architecture, their use in the visual landscape assessment is still rare. Today, the visualization of complex landscapes has become possible and the convergence of landscape- and architecture visualization is likely. 4.2 Forest Management Plan for DAmt EntlebuchS ¸ Today, Biosphere management and Forestry Commission together organise a series of workshops on the cooperative development of the forest management plan. After local people had identified the topics, being relevant to them, all groups got the opportunity to express their interests in each topic. Parallel, the VisuLands team digitized the maps with the interests of the stakeholders and overlapped them in a 3D block model (fig. 7). Finally, all interest groups met again and discussed conflicts of interest with regard to the 3D visualization. During this meeting, a task force, which works out the details of the plan proposals, was set up. These proposals will be reviewed by the forestry commission before they are included in the final forest management plan. Fig. 7: Visualization of possible interest conflicts by the interactive overlap of two thematic maps: wildlife areas (green) and summer-/winter-tourism (pink/blue) on basis of a 3D block model with c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 4> topographic map (VisuLands 2005 l'Geodaten: GIS-Koordinationsstelle, Kanton Luzern) 4.3 Tourism Most visitors are coming to Sörenberg (1165 to 2350 meters above sea level) for winter sports (fig. 8) and therefore, not only demand and supply but also safe snow conditions, become crucial driving forces. In a workshop, stakeholders from local tourism, i.e. owners of cable cars, skiing facilities and hoteliers, a scenario from clime research was visualized by colouring the heights (hypsometrie). The study by Föhn (1990) is forecasting a future level of safe snow conditions of 1500m and this level as well as all the areas below were coloured green after consultation with the moderator (fig. 9). Fig. 8: Overnight stays in Sörenberg for 2003; the 3D model shows the location of chalets (grey) and bed and breakfast, hostels and hotels (red) (VisuLands 2004 l'Geodaten: GIS-Koordinationsstelle, Kanton Luzern) After this demonstration, the focus of the discussion shifted from the enhancement of winter sports to alternatives in hiking, educational and agricultural tourism. Nevertheless, it should be noted that one participant felt uncomfortable that the 3D images were manipulating, because they had such a strong impact. This comment shows that it is important to set up not only technical but also ethical criteria for the production and application of 3D visualizations (Sheppard 2001). Fig. 9: Visualization of forecasts on safe snow conditions by colouring the 3D model, representation of skiing facilities in black, areas with artificial snow are illustrated in grey (VisuLands 2004 l'Geodaten: GIS-Koordinationsstelle, Kanton Luzern) 4.4 Agriculture The characteristic landscape of the Entlebuch has been determined by agricultural uses, especially cattle-breeding and dairy farming. Today, the farmers also maintain the moorlands, forests, floodplains and karst areas under protection (Kanton Lucerne 2002). However, the future development depends on political and economic driving forces and the liberalisation of the agricultural market will increase the pressure. For Sörenberg, photo realistic visualizations are showing the impact that different management scenarios will impose on the visual landscape. The scenarios are based on current trends and on contributions by local farmers. The following illustration (fig. 10) shows the change from today's pastures to extensive uses with large grazing areas. Fig. 10: Photorealistic visualization: shift in the visual appearance of the landscape after the change from mown pastures to extensive large grazing systems (VisuLands 2004 l'Geodaten: GISKoordinationsstelle, Kanton Luzern) c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 5> 5. Definition of Visualization Types for Participative Planning The examples above show that different planning tasks, planning phases, participants and levels of participants constitute different requirements to visualization. Therefore, the VisuLands team is defining different visualization types that are based on the results of the explorative case study research. The Dvariant treeS ¸ method, coming from decision making theory, is helping to identify the relations between different uses and visualization types. In characterizing different visualization types, three aspects are crucial: the level of detail (LOD), information content, and the level of interactivity. An adequate LOD is currently topic to an internet-based experiment at http://lrg.ethz.ch/lodtest.html (fig. 11). Information content and interactivity are the topics of two PhD theses that are written in accordance with the VisuLands project. Fig. 11: Landscape visualizations in different levels of detail, http://lrg.ethz.ch/lodtest.html (VisuLands 2004 l'Geodaten: GIS-Koordinationsstelle, Kanton Luzern) 6. References Bossart, P. (1985). Die touristische Erschliessung von Sörenberg (LU) und deren Auswirkungen U auf die lebensräumlichen Verhältnisse. Schüpfheim: Schüpfheim Verlag Buchdruckerei. Föhn, P. (1990). Schnee und Lawinen. In: Schnee, Eis und Wasser in einer wärmeren AtmosphäU re. Zürich. Lange, E., Schroth, O., & Wissen, U. (2003). Interaktive Landschaftsentwicklung. DISP, 155. U Ruoss, E., & al., e. (1998). Zukunft der Kulturlandschaften in der Schweiz : Tagungsbericht, U Symposium Sörenberg / Entlebuch, Symposium Sörenberg / Entlebuch (pp. 93): Regionalmanagement des Projekts Biosphärenreservat Entlebuch. Ruoss, E., Schmid, B., Schnider, T., & Schmid, A. (2002). Das Modell Entlebuch: Grobkonzept U Biosphärenreservat Entlebuch. Schüpfheim: Regionalmanagement Biosphärenreservat Entlebuch. Selle, K. (2000). Was? Wer? Wie? Warum? Voraussetzungen und Möglichkeiten einer nachhalU tigen Kommunikation. Dortmund: Dortmunder Vertrieb für Bau- und Planungsliteratur. Sheppard, S. R. J. (2001). Guidance for crystal ball gazers: developing a code of ethics for landsU cape visualization. Landscape and Urban Planning, 54, 183-199.
