Man Machine Interaction - Multi Media: E-learning / Multimedia:Research on the effect of dynamic versus static media We are investigating the effect of different media combinations for presentations of learning content classified in different categories (e.g. processes, principles, concepts, facts). Particularly the optimal combination of static (e.g. text, pictures) and dynamic (e.g. video, animation) media in relation to the learning content is investigated. Projects in this area are continuously being run in terms of diploma works (currently 6 Diploma-works). We take a cognitive approach in aiming to understand the mechanisms supporting learning and reusable knowledge acquisition when applying multimedia technology for learning purposes. The challenge lies in understanding the effect of small variations in media combinations, order of the various presentation effects, student control in learning progress etc. Results of empirical experiments are related to various information-processing theories. We are advocating a differentiated approach to media design in e-learning: both characteristics of the information, the learner and the media must be considered, in addition the design (complexity, layout) of the of the presentation should be implemented in according to state of the design guidelines based on empirical research. Also , it is important to take a differentiated view of the concept of knowing, this is particularly important in empirical research in this field. We test knowledge acquired by interacting with multimedia presentations in terms of passive (the case of being able to recognise correct information) and active knowledge (the case of being able to produce or reproduce information); verbal and visual knowledge, as well as the quality of the acquired knowledge (when it comes to knowledge about e.g. process content or facts content). Results of this research is successively being published (http://www.iha.bepr.ethz.ch/pages/leute/guttormsen/myhomepage/Publications.htmlhttp://www. and guidelines derived from this research are presented at http://www.iha.bepr.ethz.ch/newmedia/http://www.iha.bepr.ethz.ch/newmedia/\rh.
