Swiss network project: &quot;Photoelectrochemistry Competence Center (PECHOUSE/HyTech)&quot;
Start date: 2012-01-01
Responsible person: Jürgen Schumacher
EPFL The development of a sustainable energy economy, based not on limited fossil fuels, but on renewable, carbon-neutral energy is a necessary and urgent task. Hydrogen (H2) is a leading candidate for the storage and transportation of energy provided it can be efficiently produced from renewable energy sources and effectively stored in a safe and concentrated manner. Solar energy, the largest and most promising renewable source available, has the potential to provide sufficient power for carbon neutral H2 production via water hydrolysis on the scale required. However, solar electricity for electrolysis of water generated by state-of-the-art photovoltaics (PV) or concentrating thermal power (CSP) still remains too expensive to compete with other forms of electricity generation. Moreover, sustainable and efficient H2 production alone is not enough to realize a carbon-neutral energy economy - the safe and efficient storage and transportation of H2 also remains a critical issue for the transition towards a hydrogen-based energy supply system.

TU1401
  In response to climate change, limited fossil fuels, and rising energy demand and prices, renewable energy is heavily promoted throughout Europe. While objectives to boost renewable energy and trans-European energy networks are ambitious, it is increasingly understood that public acceptance becomes a constraining factor, and general support for green energy does not always translate into local support for specific projects. Perceived landscape change and loss of landscape quality have featured heavily in opposition campaigns in many European countries, even though renewable energy can facilitate sustainable development, especially in disadvantaged regions rich in wind, water, biomass, geothermal or solar energy. This Action  investigates the inter-relationships between renewable energy production and landscape quality, and the role of public participation for the acceptance of renewable energy systems. The Action  will develop a better understanding of how landscape protection and management, and renewable energy deployment can be reconciled to contribute socio-environmentally to the sustainable transformation of energy systems. This Action  will consolidate and extend knowledge from a pan-European perspective using a modular methodological framework. This Action  will enhance the science base for decision-making, and develop guidelines for public participation in planning renewable energy systems. The potential of sustainable landscape development, with innovative land uses producing synergies for landscape quality and renewable energy, will be revealed.

