DeepCherry: Deep transcriptome sequencing to uncover bacterial disease resistance in cherry
Start date: 2015-01-01
Responsible person: Brion Duffy
Sweet cherry (Prunus avium) and sour cherry (Prunus cerasus) are major crops in Bulgaria and Switzerland. Cherry has both high-economic value in large and small production systems and high cultural significance to rural farms, landscape richness and heritage preservation. National germplasm collections of commercial and heritage cherry varieties have been assembled and characterized in many European countries. To date characterization has focused on traits associated with fruit quality and agronomic production. Very little is known regarding the resistance/susceptibility of these cherry varieties to potentially devastating bacterial disease. Identifying varieties that have high-quality fruit as well as disease resistance/tolerance is important for improving cherry production in a sustainable, low-chemical way. This project aims to apply next-generation sequencing in order to identify promising genetic markers for disease resistance or at least strong defense responses against bacterial pathogens.

FA1104
  This Action  aims at creating a dynamic network of scientists and other professionals conducting research to improve sweet or sour cherry production in Europe, the main cherry producer. Cherries are highly appreciated fruits for their taste and nutritional properties. Their production is economically important for many fruit growers in almost every European region but there is a need for coordinated research. Therefore, this network will address all research aspects related to cherry production, commercialisation, and consumption. It will be multidisciplinary and will involve scientists working in the fields of plant breeding, genetics, genomics, agronomy, physiology, phytopathology, entomology, microbiology, post-harvest technology, and socio-economics. A special emphasis will be placed on key EU priorities such as the promotion of sustainable agriculture and adaptation to climate change. Expected deliverables will be the exchange of data between research teams, the adoption of common experimental protocols, the implementation of predictive models in the fields of epidemiology and tree phenology, and the establishment of coordinated European marker-assisted selection strategies, including multi-location field trials. Beneficiaries will include not only breeders and producers but consumers as well, through the availability of better cherries.

