Lead Lay summary the autobiographical writings of the Jesuit Jean - Joseph Surin, the triumph of divine love on the powers of hell (1660) and the experimental Science of things of the other life (1663), are of paramount importance for who wishes to approach the mystical culture and demonological thought of 17th-century french. They constitute a path to one of the most resounding events of the reign of Louis XIII: the case of the Loudun possessions (1632-1638), in which Surin, accompanied by several of his coreligionists, took part as Exorcist. A spiritual struggle that led yet to the edge of Madness: shortly after his arrival at Loudun, indeed, Surin becomes convinced that the devil is printed in the secret thoughts [of his] c? ur; ensues while a time of great darkness that will prevent the Jesuit to speak and write for nearly fifteen years, despite brief flashes of lucidity. Surin will be however a remission in 1654, date from which he writes (or dictate) a? work abundant, fully turned to the ecstatic fusion in God. The two books that hold us form the retrospective and exemplary narrative - in the rhetorical sense of the term - an issuance; above all, they are a testimony to a remarkable precision on the territories of irrationality in which reads a conscience facing the largest spiritual disarray before you recover the sublime State of grace. If it is first bloodshed before the heavenly quantities, the? work of Surin also falls within the exercise of judgment, of preaching, polemic arguments. It is located at the crossroads of several determinations - theological, epistemic, institutional - walk-in innervating the discourse of divestiture, terms that it is placed under the aegis of the evil or the divine. If they have been the subject of several recent studies, the autobiographical writings of Surin are currently available in a modern edition in many ways inadequate. The objective of this project is to overcome this lack by providing a scientific edition integral, along with important appendices.
