Lead lay summary the present research project is based on a remarkable paradox: while on the one hand the city as object of discussions and examinations is ubiquitous? at the latest since became known that 2007 50 per cent of the world population in cities lived and this number by 2050 is expected to rise to 75 per cent (Burdett 2007)? and become the litmus paper for questions of sustainability and new forms of social organisation is, there is no town planning, which deals city and its transformation with the phenomenon, in the sense on the other side of a discipline. This is because is the urban planning only by the superimposition of various other disciplines? Sociology, geography, economics, architecture, etc.? defines, and thus a truly? interdisciplinary discipline? makes out. ? Urban? is in relation to these other disciplines and permanently changed their respective influence according to. Anecdotally this evident in the absence of an independent educational institution for urban planning occupy: in France, to mention just one example, urban development is taught in architecture schools or universities (geography and Sociology Faculty). While this? porous? Nature of the discipline of urban planning? it of course has to some extent parallels to other events with similar problems, as for example medicine? was already addressed (e.g. Calabi 2008), it has never been studied as such. Is the ambitious aim of this work: a reflection on the nature of the discipline of urban planning in their changing depending on other disciplines, what is referred to here as urban planning theory. This theory will provide a model of how the discipline is defined urban planning on the influence of other disciplines; and how this influence and accordingly also the discipline urban planning over time changed. So should also to a urban development inherent problems are referred to, which is also due to the ambivalent nature of the discipline: the strict separation between theory and practice. While the, what constitutes its own urban design, if there is a separate question first. And to what extent is this own over the course of time due to the delays of disciplines of that influence it? new are added, the balance of power within the disciplines shifts, etc.?, changed. So by no means is a axiomatische - but a descriptive theory. The question and the methodological approach sit on the historical epistemology. The core of the work examines two temporary sections from the history of the discipline as case studies: the birth of the discipline around 1900 and by the rejection of modernity to 1960/70 paradigm change. The respective influence of the disciplines involved is on?Institutions? urban design? Schools, professional associations, competitions, exhibitions and magazines? compared and examined on the basis of three topics. These three themes are: 1) theories and concepts, 2) methods and instruments, 3) people. The first section that time around 1900, focused on the developments in Germany, France and England, the second, the years 1960/70, Italy and France. The theoretical approach of the research is based on the comparison of the individual topics of the two time periods, making statements about the developments and laws of the discipline can be made. Furthermore, they serve as a basis for a better understanding of contemporary developments.
