Lead in the Orlando furioso (1532) by Ludovico Ariosto are numerous stories interspersed that critics usually analyzed as novels. This research seeks to illuminate the function of entrelacement, as Ariosto was able to renew it. Lay summary the interest with which he studied the Orlando Furioso by Ludovico Ariosto is today more than ever lively and lush, yet the complexity and richness of the material remains inexhaustible. A land of inquiry not yet probed and which promises fruitful of results is that it analyses the narratives of second instance in the text: a systematic vision of the problem is the purpose of this research. The study of the internal narrative voices, in fact, is part of the discourse on entrelacement technique that Ariosto was undisputed innovator. Content on the results of a study on this aspect of the narrative strategy might be fascinating: already a first inspection it is seen that the tale of the second degree in the 1532 is Furious vehicle of a more underground speech on the role of Word in human relationships. Better understand the logic and the meanings of this narrative tool cannot prescind from a reflection on its diachronic evolution and relationships of the text with the tradition. A first part of the work will be devoted to measuring the transformation of the role of internal narratives between the first redaction of the novel (1516) and the last (1532). This corpus are then added so-called autograph Fragments and the five songs, textual segments important to observe closely the construction of entrelacement. The search will then proceed to a thorough comparison with previous and contemporary texts that the Furious encompasses and reprocesses. The comparison will focus primarily on the frequency of use of internal narratives; on their morphology; on the linguistic aspect; narrative dynamics that see in place; about the purposes for which they are introduced; the effects they produce in the plot; content that enter; on the characters involved. You will try to measure the influence of models such as the exemplum and confession. Will be reconsidered at this stage some of the most important aspects of Renaissance culture in which the Ariosto was set: the philosophical debate about modern man's education and identity formation; the reflection around human relationships in courtier; the political and religious crisis. A comparative approach, therefore, will highlight the new meaning attributed by Abib, both on the structural plan of the narrative content of the second degree. 
