Lead lay summary the present project deals with the construction of two acting mighty scholars roles of modernity, that of the public critic and one of the official experts. In contrast, the two roles as complementary rather than as antagonistic, become popular research opinions and and the expert not gravediggers as a pioneer of the critic. Decisive phase for the design of these roles the past one hundred years of the Ancien be regarded as Régime, and for those of the experts and England for those of the critic the leading role attributed to France. Methodologically, the study tracks a comprehensive historicization and contextualization of scholar self-portrayal. Terms such as expert, critic, scholar Republic, usefulness and public opinion are not applied to the story as analytical categories, but first investigated as historical categories. The body of sources ranging from dictionaries and treatises about letters and Commission reports, prints and paintings. Supporters and opponents of the respective role of the scholars are equally as both in their construction were involved and because the role ideals in controversy especially plastic stand out. The findings are then contextualized: with regard to the forms of scholarly institutionalization, with regard to the Organization of book market and censorship, and with regard to the importance of audience and patronage. This approach allows to determine the political functions of scholars roles and to work out the structural contradictions between ideals of roles and scholarly practice. To show the importance of different contexts, France and England undergo comparative. Was abolished in England the Government prior censorship already 1695 and 1710 replaced with a copyright method, so she remained in France until the revolution. On Government, so in England was the establishment of academies in France based on private support. Acting political critics in England in a parliamentary party system, as in France in a monarchical State. The comparative study of the two countries is all the more rewarding when it allows also conclusions on the future development of Anglo-Saxon and continental European science culture.
