Lead the project addresses utopian thinking and literary utopias in the 20th century, mainly in the German-speaking Jews. The thesis that the utopia be understood as an expression of a political historical sense of possibility rather than spatial or temporal projection can be in the Centre, stands first. Secondly, the project assumes that utopia is internally correlates with a diaspora consciousness: everything is possible at any time. This situation allows an innovative perspective on the Jewish discourse in the literature on the one hand, on the other hand also on German literature, which refers to no more than literature. Lay summary the concept of utopia (literally non-place) exists since 1516, as the later English Lord Chancellor of Thomas more published his book utopia. This became the pattern for later utopias. In the 19th century, there is a so-called temporality of Utopia, no longer the distant island, but the future is the venue of the new man. In the 20th century reached the utopian writing also in the german Jewish intellectual history. Theodor Herzl's novel old Neuland (1902), which describes in a future Palestine, a Zionist utopia is the most famous of these texts. But other authors design not only the utopias of a Jewish State in the land of Israel, but also the utopias of the diaspora. The project will first analyse the writings of Nathan Birnbaum (1864-1937) that are central for the utopian discourse in Judaism. 1907 Birnbaum has tried around with a design to a Jewish science fiction ("after a thousand years"), to conceive of a Utopia without nation States against Herzl's ideas. In addition to unknown and rarely read authors then canonical authors of German and german Jewish literature should be included: E.G. novels of Alfred Döblin - who carried out a correspondence about the problem of a Jewish State with Nathan Birnbaum in the 1930s - and Franz Werfel. It is enlightening to see that in German, American and Israeli contemporary literature, between Utopia and diaspora resurfaces and is very productive. Novels have appeared in the 2000 years so, which go out of alternative historical concepts, describe about fictional Jewish States. Also in the fine arts (E.g., Yael Bartana) the idea of fictional Jewish States appears in Europe and elsewhere. The project will finally treat this contemporary manifestations of Utopia and diaspora as a reflection of utopian thinking in the 20th century.  
