Lead Lay summary Associating genome reorganization with evolutionary diversification remains an enduring challenge of evolutionary biology. Transposable Elements (TEs) - also called jumping genes - are postulated to play a pivotal role in shaping genome architecture, triggering restructuring and functional changes, and producing abundant raw material for evolution. As divergent chromosomal structure contributes to hybrid infertility, reducing the level of recombination around rearranged segments and thereby restricting gene exchange, TEs may be important in promoting reproductive isolation. As chromosome doubling specifically restores the fertility of hybrids between structurally divergent genomes, we choose to investigate the role of TEs in chromosomal speciation among diploid taxa of the young autopolyploid complex Biscutella laevigata (Brassicaceae). Producing low genome snapshots by 454 sequencing, we unravel TE families contributing to genome organization in divergent populations of B. laevigata. Then, producing hybrids between naturally occurring diploids as well as synthetic polyploids, we assess whether intraspecific divergence in genome structure results in reproductive isolation. Using complementary molecular tools, we track immediate reorganization (restructuring vs. methylation changes) in contrasted genome fractions (TEs vs. random sequences) to reveal the mechanisms underlying reproductive isolation. In a complementary sub-project, we investigate how genome reorganization is related to ecological differentiation and local adaptation, making use of landscape genetics approaches to infer spatial genetic structure and identify patterns of local adaptation. Setting up a reciprocal transplant experiment among selected sites, we will detect patterns of local adaptation to environmental heterogeneity. In autopolyploids, local adaptation is predicted to evolve with genome restructuring that decreases polysomic inheritance. Accordingly, experimental crossing of selected accessions will assess whether locally adapted populations present increased levels of disomic inheritance as compared to populations showing signature of recent expansion.
