Lead Lay summary State of research: This research project?s thematic core is the study of the psychotherapy process and outcome of cognitive behavioral treatments with patients who suffer from general anxiety disorder (GAD). There is still little knowledge about why psychotherapy patients in general (and GAD patient in specific) improve or worsen during psychotherapy. Instead of creating more and more new overall treatment-packets in a medical meta-model, the most powerful approach may be to understand and ameliorate already effective psychotherapies. Treatment rationales and manuals allow a relatively high degree of freedom of therapist behavior on how to implement such manuals. One possibility of variation depends upon the quality of therapists? application of resource-oriented microinterventions during the therapy sessions and how they capitalize on partners and significant relationships. Main research question: Can a well-introduced cognitive behavioral treatment for patients with GAD be ameliorated by systematized resource-oriented microinterventions on patients and their partners? Study design: In this 3-year-SNF Ambizione-proposal, three ways of conducting a disorder-specific, cognitive behavioral treatment (Zinbarg et al., 2006) are contrasted using randomized controlled study design: (a) Resource priming based on a resource-oriented case formulation; (b) resource-oriented couple support; and (c) Problem priming based on a disorder-oriented case formulation. A 3 x 4 design is used with one between-subject factor (resource priming vs. resource-oriented couple support vs. problem priming) and one within-subject factor (time: pre, mid, post, follow-up; respectively sess-by-sess assessment analysed by longitudinal hierarchical linear models). Study population: A total of 78 patients (26 participants in each of the three conditions) with a primary DSM-IV GAD diagnosis will be recruited by means of advertisements in local newspapers and through Internet forums. The therapies will be conducted by advanced cognitive-behavioral therapy trainees at the psychotherapy outpatient clinic in the Department of Psychology at the University of Zurich. The therapists will be trained and supervised by Dr. Zinbarg, Dr. Flückiger, and cognitive-behavioral supervisors that specialize in couples? therapy. Advanced Master?s students from the Universities of Bern and Zurich will conduct observer-based video ratings. Intervention : Resource priming and resource-oriented couple support mainly uses the following two/three strategies to foster resource-oriented microinterventions (Flückiger et al., 2010): (a) Assessment: Individual strengths of the patient are systematically documented by an individual case formulation in individuals and in couples at pre and (b) Priming: Immediately before sessions 1 to 5, therapists have a systematic five-minute preparation about how to implement resource-oriented microinterventions in the forthcoming session. (c) Integrating the partners within the resource-oriented couple support condition.
