Lead Lay summary Arising from a frustration between a local tendency for helical ordering and global space filling constraints, cholesteric blue phase liquid crystals exhibit remarkable three-dimensional structures in which modulated chiral orientational order is stabilized by a lattice of topological defects. Though significant progress has been made over the last 30 years in characterizing the structure and properties of the cubic blue phases and a large body of research has focused on the interfacial coupling of other liquid crystalline phases at topographic surfaces, little work has addressed how these frustrated chiral systems couple to complex geometries. Because of their local anisotropy and global three-dimensional periodicity, blue phase liquid crystals are not only sensitive to external fields and interfaces but provide a means to exquisitely control the propagation of electromagnetic waves. For instance, blue phases can be considered as tunable, self-assembled photonic bandgap materials and a number of promising photonic effects have been demonstrated using such materials. Consequently, robust interfacial control over blue phase crystallographic orientation has long been of fundamental as well as technological interest. In the current proposal, we employ a unique approach to the study of the interfacial coupling of blue phase liquid crystals that incorporates state of art nanolithography - two-photon polymerization writing - along with a combination of reflection micro-spectroscopy and Kossel diffractive imaging to precisely determine blue phase crystallographic alignment at complex topographic surfaces. The high-resolution, large-area writing capabilities, and flexibility of computer aided design provided by two-photon writing will allow for fabricating topographic surfaces having periodicity and geometry commensurate with the orientational order at blue phase crystallographic faces. In a series of systematic experiments, we plan to study blue phase crystallographic alignment as a function of topographic geometries (e.g. lattice constant, rotational symmetry, height, etc.), temperature gradients and cooling rates, and applied electric fields. In addition, we will direct this research towards the development of methods to finely control blue phase crystallographic alignment and systematically explore the capabilities that this approach provides.
