Lead attention is a fundamental, complex cognitive function that is based on several components. These components are represented in various networks of regions in the human brain. It is assumed that the interactions between these networks control our attention performance. The exact modes of interaction but hitherto little investigated. This project will contribute to the research. Lay summary attention can be defined as the willingness quickly and accurately respond to stimuli in our environment to and select the ability between relevant and irrelevant information. A current model posits that Visual attention on two different networks of brain regions is represented. These are differently represented in the two halves of the brain and convey different aspects of Visual attention (E.g. spatial/non-spatial). It is assumed that the interactions of these attention networks within and between the halves of the brain control the spatial attention performance. Half pages neglect, a frequent result of a breach of the right half of the brain, seem to also the interference of these interactions. Patients with a half sides neglect have trouble in the left half of the room's attention and behave as if they would not exist. The exact interaction of attention networks has been investigated hitherto little. Aim of this project is to investigate various aspects of these interactions and their influence on the visual perception of both healthy volunteers and patients with a half sides neglect. Transcranial Magnetic stimulation is a technique, mainly used in the study. This method allows non-invasive and painless temporarily the activity of a specific area of the cerebral cortex to influence. Thus, conclusions on the function of individual components of attention networks and their interactions can be drawn. The project will contribute on the one hand, to gain a better understanding of the control of Visual attention in the human brain. On the other hand, the findings could come to the understanding and treatment of attention deficit disorder after brain injury, in particular by the half pages neglect.
