Lead Lay summary traditionally, studies on the turn cultural of the century 13th - 14th resorted to a dualistic interpretative grid characterized by l? opposition of two cultural models, the Augustinian model and the Aristotelian model. Following the rediscovery and the dissemination of texts d?Aristotle, these two models would confront and trigger a transition marked the gradual decline of the Augustinian model and, in this way, some of the assumptions of the medieval Christian thought. L? opposition between those two models is at any level. It concerns d? first natural philosophy, where l? influence Aristotelian solicits l? interest for physics and connected disciplines; It also concerns the anthropological level, the Augustinian vision centered on original sin and the role of grace s? vision opponent naturalist Aristotelian. Finally, this opposition urges the political level and it has found a point d? support in l? so-says? political augustinism?, namely l? label by which have been defined, since the d?Arquilliere, l? all of the doctrines for the Papal theocracy as developed, at least in part, by members of l?Order of the hermits of St. Augustine (OESA). In this mapping, Dante Alighieri, whose claim of the earthly happiness as the end of mankind in this world and the doctrine of the universal monarchy are clearly inspired d?Aristotle, easily won the place of thinker? anti-augustinien? short. This presupposition deeply limited studies, to the point that, except in the case of confessions, whose attendance is generally accepted, is unknown to this day what works?Augustin were familiar to Dante, what type of knowledge they had, and what influence exerted upon him. Gold, the interpretative grid which is upstream from the? current state research has made l? object d? a major review critical over the last decade. While knowledge of l?"S OESA? deepens, medievalists have criticized the concept?"political augustinism"as lacking historical Foundation indeed. Where the crisis of the dualistic model in favor of? a different model, close to l? acculturation, highlighting the interactions between augustinism and Aristotelianism and their different equilibria in l? horizon of reflection of the 13th and 14th centuries. Elaborations anthropological, political and on the theology of l? history of Dante Alighieri then provide ground d? as much more significant than? they seem to be within l? horizon of his time, l? furthest extreme of Augustinian thought. It is therefore more interesting to grasp what the Augustinian model remains active at Dante and how this s permanently? articulates with other nuclei of his reflection. It is therefore desirable to resume this folder, so that you can finally respond to questioning qu? it raises a textual and contextual based on reliable. This project aims at achieving four main objectives: 1) from the texts, it s? is? first d? evaluate l? entity of the present Augustinian "reminiscences" in reflection of Dante. We use the term "reminiscences" to distinguish this type of survey that own the source criticism practiced traditionally. by "reminiscences", refers to a spectrum which includes: (i) the generic reference to l? Augustinian auctoritas; (ii) the quote explicit Augustinians texts (or considered such by Dante); (iii) the implicit quotation of these texts; (iv) the resumption of various materials; (v) the resumption of structures, or "patterns", discursive, even if applied to different topics of those treated by Augustine himself.  This first objective seeks to prepare a comprehensive statement of "reminiscences" once reported the critically - what s? necessary due to fragmentation of studies - and to integrate this list by a new analysis of Dante works, with special attention to the latter type of reminiscence, the resumption of discursive structures, because the most neglected studies. (2) then it will be question d? evaluate procedures for transmission of these "reminiscences", if through direct or indirect, one-time or long-term, etc., and so the type of attendance which they are l? index. (3) in parallel, we propose to judge l? originality of the times by Dante in the context of his time.  The 2nd and the 3rd objective committed both consideration of the medieval tradition, what? will continue by different methods according to the type of reporting reminiscence: (a) for the citations of specific passages surveys will be conducted in the main database (PL, CETEDOC, MGH, etc.), to grasp their dissemination, as well as the d rings? possible indirect transmission. (b) in the case of more complex flashbacks, there will be records of texts by d? other authors of the later Middle Ages to drill the meaning of the times by Dante and point its close controversial referents. Among the texts considered, it will favour works? argument policy l? time of Dante; comments from De civitate Dei in the first half of the 14th, including the Dominican Nicholas Trevet; Finally, the older reviews of the Commedia because significant Augustinian culture of l? time of Dante. (4) Finally, it s? will be d? establish if the positions taken by Dante, while certainly controversial to the Papal theocracy of his time, were also designed by him as anti-augustiniennes in the proper sense. This task is to clarify the notion that Dante had the distinction between Augustin and political theories developed in the early Middle Ages, therefore to situate his thoughts in the current historiographical framework where the d category? «augustinism political» archived, d? «»political anti-augustinisme' request to be questioned not less carefully. This last objective is critical and interpretative nature and it will be achieved through the overall account labeled "reminiscences", including their uses in the arguments of Dante. This project involves the construction of? a database to capture otherwise difficult to identify recurrences because l? scale of this material. This s? is especially useful, for example, for l? individuation of the potential indirect transmission rings. The results of this project will be communicated as its progress and summaries in a monograph on this subject. 
