Lead although the music historiography in the songs of Schubert and Beethoven's realized a new ideal of song, which is decisive for the further history of the genus falls the song culture in Vienna around 1800 until today in a musicological grey zone. The inherited parent pointing of the undisputed posts of Schubert and Bethovens to the genus expression requires a corrective that includes the Vienna context of song creation from the perspective of cultural turns after. Lay summary the project takes up this desideratum and combines historical music research with genuine culture scientific approaches, issues and methods. The planned development of the hitherto only partially covered and evaluated yet hardly musically or historically associated Wiener song stock dating from between about 1755 and 1825 is fundamental. It features of a reception from the North and South of Germany can through the inclusion of song-historical unrecognized source for the early phase of the Viennese song practice and interactions with related genera (stage song, Singspiel ARIA) are exposed, which contribute to the understanding of the specific requirements of the Viennese song composition. The investigation period until the 1820s leading years allows new insights about contemporary impact and reception are of the songs of Schubert and Beethoven's and song concepts and modes of composition in their immediate work environment. In the Centre of the study the analytical examination of the variety of poetic musical manifestations of the repertoire that is outlined in this way, is on the other hand its contextual anchor through the reconstruction of origins and performance conditions, carrier layers, forms of cooperation between poets and composers, professional musicians and amateurs, Vortragsmodalitäten, reception and dissemination mechanisms. The in reference-setting of both approaches opened additional levels of interpretation. Starting from an understanding that includes the songs in the overall structure of their poetic musical structures, tradition media and recording features as parts of a socio-cultural reference field, possible performance situations as well as song aesthetic positions can further differentiate and put into perspective so far witnessed committed performances. This concerns the previously claimed non-existence of an aesthetic discussion about that?Wiener song? as well as the common Antithetisierung of?Handling music? versus?Performance music? or?Opportunity song? versus?Art song?, of the project alternative viewpoints of a context-dependent?Both? as well? opposes. The looming plurality of song concepts, compositional invoices and style registers, which helps to clarify the genus historical footing, Schubert and his contemporaries were confronted with, and to make fertile for a reassessment of the actual proportion of the Viennese song culture on the further history of the genus is one of the most critical earnings prospects of the project. 
