Lead Lay summary Applying strong electric fields to a metallic tip with nanometer sharpness enables field emission due to electron tunneling into the vacuum. Field emission produces highly coherent electron beams because the source size is comparable to the coherence length inside metals. During coherent electron waves tunneling through the surface barrier, more than two electrons are not allowed to be emitted within the coherence time and area because electrons are expelling each other due to the Pauli principle: this phenomenon is called anti-bunching of electrons and known as the most fundamental property of electrons in quantum mechanics. If two detectors are set at equal distances from the apex, we can see this phenomenon by counting electrons emitted from different points of the coherent area on the tip apex in a time-resolved way. This experiment is known as Hanbury Brown-Twiss (HBT) experiment. The direct observation of anti-bunching of electrons by this experiment, however, was impossible so far for two reasons: (1) no spatially and temporally dense electron beam is available in which two electrons are emitted within the coherence time and area, and (2) no techniques are available to delay either of the two electron beams with a time resolution better than the coherence time. Only recently, we have realized an ultrafast pulsed field-emission source with emission site selectivity on a few tens of nanometers scale by focusing laser pulses onto the apex of field emission tips. This technique can reach spatio-temporal control of the electron emission within the coherence area and time of the electrons inside a metal. By using this technique, a new generation of experiments which allows direct observation of anti-bunching of electrons can be envisioned. If two laser pulses are applied for the emission of two electron beams from two different sites on the tip, spaced only a few tens of nanometers apart, we could have two electron beams within coherence area and time. The delay between two electron beams can be controlled by changing the delay between two laser pulses, where femtosecond time resolution is possible. Thus, direct observation of anti-bunching of electrons during coherent electron tunneling should be feasible. Our goal of this project is direct observation of the anti-bunching of electrons from the laser-induced field emission by performing the proposed experiments above. These kinds of experiments should create new directions in ultrafast electron dynamics, surface science, electron holography and quantum information science.
