Lead when part of the immune system does not work properly or is missing, three main problems can occur: the infection defense may be impaired, it can cause immune dysregulationen (E.g. autoimmune diseases), or but the Krebszellabwehr may be impaired. Primary (congenital) immunodeficiency occurs when one or more organs, tissues, cells or proteins of the body's immune system is missing or malfunctioning due to a genetic defect. We study the mechanisms which lead to an immune deficiency with immune dysregulation. This disease is called ELA syndrome due to the combination of severe diarrhea (enteropathy), lack of immune cells (lymphopenia) and autoimmune diseases (diabetes, anemia and hair loss). Summary, we examine a new, life-threatening primary immune deficiency, which is characterized by the simultaneous existence of autoimmune disease and a lowered resistance to virus infections lay. This disease is called ELA syndrome due to the combination of severe diarrhea (nteropathie E), lack of immune cells (L ymphopenie) and A utoimmunkrankheiten (anemia, diabetes and hair loss). A genetic defect underlying the ELA syndrome. Due to the combination of the discomfort of enteropathy, lymphopenia, and auto-immune diseases we assumed, that it is a disease of the immune system/immune system. In the mouse model, our investigations show however, that the genetic defect affects not only the immune system, but that also other organ systems are affected. We examine the function of immune cells in our project therefore on the one hand, on the other hand the interaction between immune cells and other organ systems. In particular the interaction between epithelial cells and lymphocytes in the thymus in the focus of our studies is so. In the thymus (german:?)Sweetbreads?) a part from precursor lymphocytes with the help of so-called epithelial cells to mature lymphocytes mature and? learns? This alien (i.e. components of infectious agents) by own (endogenous tissue) to distinguish and react only against foreign. A dysfunctional interactions between lymphocytes and thymus epithelial with a reason might, that patients suffering from autoimmune diseases, that the immune system alien not own can distinguish. To sum up, that the PA's disease is a disease which affects not only the immune system, but very likely also the epithelia. There are common molecular processes, which take place both epithelial and immune cells. It is therefore conceivable that the genetic defect in ELA disease of one of these molecular concerns.
