Lead The ventral tegmental area (VTA) is a component of the mesolimbic reward circuit essential for learning the association between predicting stimuli and motivationally-relevant outcomes. We report here the identification of a peculiar VTA neuronal population that sends long-range projections to innervate the hippocampus in the mouse. This cellular population present mixed GABAergic/glutamatergic phenotype. Lay summary The ventral tegmental area (VTA) is a component of the mesolimbic reward circuit essential for learning the association between predicting stimuli and motivationally-relevant outcomes. While dopaminergic cells, the principal VTA neuronal population, attracted most of the interest for this structure, not as much attention has been focused on the less represented GABAergic or glutamatergic populations.  We report here the identification of a peculiar VTA neuronal population that sends long-range projections to innervate the hippocampus in the mouse.  Using GAD65-Cre mice, retrograde tracing and optogenetic tools combined with in vitro electrophysiological recordings of acute VTA and hippocampal brain slices, we show that VTA GABAergic neurons make functional synapses in the granule cell layer of the dentate gyrus (DG) and, to a lesser extent, in the strata radiatum, pyramidale and oriens of the CA2 region. In vitro optical stimulation of these ChR2-expressing terminals during voltage clamp recordings gives rise to small postsynaptic currents (PSCs) onto DG granule cells. Surprisingly, pharmacological antagonism or blockade of the ionotropic GABAA receptor with bicuculline or picrotoxin, is not able to completely abolish light-evoked PSCs, revealing a residual current that is sensitive to the AMPA/kainate receptor antagonist NBQX. Similarly, using VGLUT2-Cre mice we show the presence of glutamate-releasing neurons in the VTA that project onto DG granule cells, where they elicit bicuculline- and NBQX- sensitive PSCs.  Altogether, the present data hints at the existence of a previously undescribed population of VTA neurons with mixed GABAergic/glutamatergic phenotype that provides a direct connection with the DG.
