Lead Lay summary this research aims to understand how healthy women, who received a diagnosis of predisposition to breast and ovarian cancer, manage their genetic risk in the period preceding the outbreak of the disease. At the base of the issue lies the assumption that manage the genetic risk is a complex work that lasts in time. During the management phase, the individual is not only expected to adopt behaviours to reduce the risk from the medical point of view, but must also continually rearrange its way of life. However, the redevelopment of the existence is problematic because it must be done in a context of uncertainty, that is in a context that does not strict and unambiguous guidelines as to how the most effective and the most suitable to behave. Indeed, several surveillance and prevention measures are recommended to the women in question. Nevertheless, all of these options have drawbacks for daily life without provide guarantees of effectiveness and be able to say their indispensability. In addition, the status of person at genetic risk is crossed by normative requirements from different institutions which may be contradictory. Thus, management lines adopted may seem potentially illegitimate in the eyes of the person himself and his entourage. In the light of this problem, the research objectives are firstly, the illustration of the trajectories of risk management (process to the? work during the reorganization of the mode of life, key moments, factors of transition from one phase to the other), on the other hand, the understanding of the lifestyles that fit around the different forms of risk (form of adopted medical management medical management(, repercussions on daily life and on the system of representation of self and future identity). Falling in the course of the comprehensive qualitative studies, this research will involve grounded theorising procedures. It will reap life stories during campaigns of interviews with 30 women in good health having been diagnosed at genetic risk of developing breast and ovarian cancer at cancer four years previously. Beyond the clearing of paths and ways of life in relation to the management of the genetic risk of cancer, this research aims to contribute to theoretical reflection on action in situations of uncertainty, particularly focusing on the relationship between action and institutions.
