A supermassive black hole that is millions of times heavier than the Sun is located in the centres of almost all large galaxies, our Milky Way Galaxy, lead. Active galactic nuclei can emit more than 10 billion times as much energy as the Sun, and some of them are the brightest objects in the universe. Theorists postulate that black holes at Galaxy collisions begin to shine and that material of the galaxies in the black hole falls. However, most of the growing black holes in the universe are very hard to find because they are surrounded by very high column densities of absorbent material. Progress recently achieved in the measurement of x-rays now allow it to locate these hidden populations of growing black holes as these rays can penetrate large amounts of gas and dust. The aim of the project is to find out how to grow these hidden black holes by Galaxy collisions. Lay summary content and aim of the research project this research project I am studying the growth of black holes at Galaxy mergers of newfound active galaxy cores that were hidden by large quantities of gas and dust. I will use the new weighting methods in X-ray satellites to discover these populations of well-hidden active galaxy nuclei. My research will deal with the following questions: 1 how often these well hide active galactic nuclei before? 2. how important are they to the growth of black holes? 3. are there instructions on gravitational recoil Galaxy collisions?   Scientific and social context of the research project I will look for indirect evidence of gravitational waves, the waves in the space and time, yet never directly measured. These experiments are performed using state of the art measurement technology which, in turn, will benefit the development of specialized manufacturers and which often lead to breakthroughs in other technology sectors.   Keywords super massive black holes, active galaxies, black hole recoil, high energy astrophysics, gravity waves, galaxy mergers, X-ray instrumentation, radio instrumentation, high resolution imaging, accretion processes
