Lead Lay summary The financial investments to successfully conduct this experiment are very modest considering the profound implications that the potential observation of antigravity will imply in our understanding of the law governing the Universe. Recently, a new experiment aiming to measure the free gravity fall of antihydrogen has been approved at CERN and a second is being proposed. These experiments and this application should be seen as complementary. A gravity free fall measurement is sensitive to the local gravitational field strength g while the method proposed here is sensitive to the gravitation potential difference. Another important implication of the proposed experiment is that it will result in the most precise determination of the ratio positron/electron mass. This would be the most stringent CPT symmetry test in the leptonic sector. Furthermore, this measurement will lead to a very sensitive test of bound-state quantum electrodynamics (QED) which is the theory describing the atom energy levels and which is theoretically very intriguing. At the moment, the positronium theory is three times better than the experiment, thus, this new measurement will not only fill this gap but also motivate new efforts from the theorists. Positronium is a pure leptonic system free of the hadronic corrections and the proton radius. Therefore, a precise determination of its energy levels could help to shed some light on the recent results obtained at PSI with muonic hydrogen which are not in agreement wit the QED calculations. The 1S-2S transition was measured in 1993 with a precision of 2.4 x 10-9. To reach the 10-10 level we need to improve the accuracy of this measurement by a factor of 25 which is very challenging but, we believe, in reach with the technological achievement, which occurred during these last two decades. Both the production of positronium (achieved in our group) and the required laser technology have been strongly improved. Practically, we want to measure the transition frequency between ground (1S) and first excited state (2S) (referenced to a matter clock) at different gravitational potential. In order to enhance the sensitivity we do not perform the measurement at different altitudes, but we use the gravitational field of the earth moving around the sun, ie. we make use of the eccentricity of the earth's orbit around the sun. The large distance variation (of about 5 million kilometers) between the sun and the earth during the year make it possible to observe antigravity if the 1S-2S transition is measured better than 10-10 precision. All material clocks (including hydrogen and Cs) are blue-shifted when moved to a region of lower gravitational attraction (increasing for example the height above the sea level). Contrarily, if antigravity exists, the antimatter-clock (eg. antihydrogen) would be red-shifted and positronium, which is made of a particle (the electron) and an antiparticle (the positron), would not suffer for any shift. Neutral atoms do not suffer of this systematic effect and, therefore, are unique candidates for testing antigravity. The gravitational redshift predicted by general relativity was one of the great implications of Einstein's theory that was demonstrated experimentally. The pace of two identical clocks placed at different gravitational potentials is different. Attempts using charged particles (positrons and antiprotons) failed due to the large systematic errors originating from stray electromagnetic fields. Gravity is 36 orders of magnitude weaker than the electromagnetic force. Even though theoretical arguments seem to preclude the existence of anti-gravity, i.e. the possibility that the gravitational interaction between particles and antiparticles could be repulsive instead of attractive, no experiment excluded it yet. The primary goal of this project is to perform the first direct measurement of the effect of gravity on anti-matter.
