The industrial companies of the 20th century brought lead to themselves and their own bodies with specific conditions. Career opportunities, consumer and leisure activities were important, older concepts of the balance between work and rest lost in importance. Lay summary P {margin-bottom: 0. 21cm; line-height: 150%; text-align: justify; page-break-before: auto;}P.Western {font-weight: normal;}P.CJK {font-size: 10pt;} P {margin-bottom: 0. 21cm; line-height: 150%; text-align: justify; page-break-before: auto;}P.Western {font-weight: normal;}P.CJK {font-size: 10pt;} Content and the aim of the research project these people, so the initial thesis, to bustling more accurately be considered: in the community perceptions of the first half of the 20th century as in the debates to the scientifically supported regulation of companies, the operation represented a central reference point. He took a similar role so like the factory during the industrialization and the company today. Therefore, it is not surprising that contemporaries generally used the textbook, so the bustling economic activity, also to the description of the people surrounding them. The project examines the history of this bustling people on the basis of a consisting of two parts corpus of sources from the period between the 1890s and 1980s. The evaluation illustrated magazines, there is a first explained in the historical context. By parsing about 100 diaries will secondly wondered how the bustle in the self-descriptions of young workers and employees can be found. This proves that the history of bustling man with views of his entire life between operations, (question) leisure and family can be described and that consumer actions played an increasing role. P {margin-bottom: 0. 21cm; line-height: 150%; text-align: justify; page-break-before: auto;}P.Western {font-weight: normal;}P.CJK {font-size: 10pt;} Scientific and social context before the background of current research in a history of the self (productive) does the project contribute to the social and cultural history of industrial and consumer societies of the 20th century.
