Lead lay summary 1 event: starting point of the research project is the phenomenon of modernising the institutions responsible in various countries of Europe in the area of pharmaceutical legislation. The law has evolved in the course of the 20th century with the central aim of the drug safety: from the obligation to register you has come to an authorisation requirement. That man has developed after approval, taking into account the health of the consumer. The central goal of security alone explains not the developments in the area of drug law but since the late of 1990s. The procedures have been harmonised in part since the 1990s due to the influence of international bodies. The administrative institutions under investigation involved countries (Germany, France, Great Britain, United States, Switzerland) today in the various, are originated in a similar period or have been modernized. 2. objectives: The overall project is to contribute to the rationalisation of the regulatory policy and serve as orientation for law-enforcement bodies. Two related objectives will be achieved through the work. First, the networking and the interactions of the actors in the multi-level system should be systematized. The complexity of the current legal systems to resolve through a transparent and detailed analysis of the actors and procedures, to work out an overall picture of regulatory policy at the end. On the other hand, the work on the basis of the advantages and disadvantages of the different legal systems aims to contribute to a coherent model for the modern regulatory policy in the field of medicinal products. Regardless, this model should be applicable by the country and its legal traditions. 3. method: The empirical part of the work will be based on document review and analysis of reports and legal sources. The practice of the authorities will be investigated using the methods of comparative of law. The functional elements, especially considering be considered in comparison. Differences but also similarities will be examined and explained. 4. relevance: developed countries today are confronted with the same challenges in the area of drug law: safety, health, but also efficiency. The regulatory policy in the field of pharmaceutical legislation must meet these challenges. All countries that need to accommodate a strong pharmaceutical industry a regulatory policy develop that meet these potentially conflicting goals.
