Lead Videogames (VG) are at the heart of an important debate in our society. On the one hand, they can become of significant value for education and training. On the other hand, research in social sciences has shown that violent media content decreases prosocial behavior and desensitizes individuals to real-life violence. There are thus increasing concerns from parents, educators and policymakers, as to whether violent VG have long-term impact on socio-affective development. Lay summary to date, the psychological and neural mechanisms by which video games (JV) would influence the behaviour and social and emotional development are unknown: they affect personality? On the perception of emotions d? others from our own emotions, on our ability to regulate our emotions? L? reverse, pro-social JV could produce beneficial effects? Demonstrate such a positive impact would have an important societal value and contribute to the debate on the way in which our company develops and interacts with virtual worlds. This project aims to identify the psychological and neural mechanisms by which the JV are likely d? influence our social behaviour. We will study l? impact of violent and pro-social JV on the perception of pain. We distinguish the effects d? a short-term exposure? Suite in a one-off exhibition? long term effects? following several years of practice. We will examine if these impact 1) our ability to recognize pain d? others, 2) our resistance to physical pain 3) and our propensity to inflict pain to others in a conflict situation. Finally, using functional magnetic resonance imaging, we characterize the neural mechanisms associated with these effects. In addition to the potential societal impact of this work, it will allow d? identify the psychobiological factors by which these learning take place, complementing the medium d? a transdisciplinary approach, existing models in social psychology. Finally, the understanding of such mechanisms has wider implications: it will contribute to a better understanding of the plasticity of the limbic system as a whole, enriching our thinking on developments that such tools could bring its educational and Interventional.
