Lead the borders of L?ATTICA. Study of the border landscape d? a city Greek: Archaeology and historical geography. Lay summary in the cities, borders Greece marked the limits of l? territorial, political and economic authority. As most of the confines of the Greek cities, the boundaries of Athens evolved as a result of the expansions military, political alliances and the invasions that led or suffers the city during its long history. Borders therefore represent a source majeure d? information for the researcher, to take a new look at Athens, from its periphery and not from its urban centre. Segments of the border or remains types have certainly attracted l? attention of researchers for more d? a century, but it n? exists not to date a conceptual study and history of the borders of l?Attica. This project is designed to fill this gap by offering a study successive boundaries of the Athenian territory, documenting the causes and examine the consequences d? a point across political, religious and economic, between the end of?The Bronze age and l? Roman. This work consists of two parts. The first attempts to locate the borders at different periods of l? Athenian history. This step includes a geographical study of the natural limits of Attica, a test for the return of the ancient landscape (thanks to the cores), setting up d? a new archaeological map of l? human occupation in Attica based on GIS, thus qu? a review of literary and Epigraphic sources. The second studied the border identity through multiple angles: facies of the demes (villages) located near the borders, the differences between the marginal regions and the rest of the territory, the economic weight of the neighbouring land, or even l? influence of border policies? land. One of the goals is to understand the impact of the border line on populations living on part and sides of it. L? dominant opinion in modern research often described border areas as areas on the margins of the city, with a marginal character in contrast with l? urban order. This opinion is however called into doubt by an analysis conceptual and economic of the micro-regions that form the 'border regions' l?Attica. One perceives at the end of the archaic era an intensification of the habitat in the most isolated micro-as well as pressure on the soil most likely caused by a demographic boost. Of the regions that were unattractive long subject to new interests. These different phenomena cause tensions between neighbouring States, which can degenerate into conflicts. The establishment of borders becomes a crucial issue, which poses many political, economic, legal and social issues. Although the interdisciplinary study is centered on l?Penthouse, she has ambition however to serve as a point of reference for l? study of the boundaries of the Greek cities. Additional information can be obtained on www.bordersofattica.org  
