Lead lay summary since the late 19th century a modern Yiddish culture that newly situate themselves in the following decades by migration movements and the reorganization of the national borders of Eastern Europe across different countries and continents evolved into the Russian Empire. The new and old centres of this Eastern European Jewish diaspora remained as communicating rooms continue to persons and the transfer of ideologies and texts connected with. At the same time found one? geartete differently from place to place? Participation in the majoritarian culture instead. The research is aimed to describe the complex mixture location of this transnational Yiddish culture area historically and to analyse on the basis of selected case studies. The transnational biographies of individual players and transnational migration as a phenomenon of modern Jewish history research are at the heart of the investigation. It is assumed that it could affect in the Yiddish-speaking Transmigranten access during a longer period of time their professional and political activities across different national upright received, relative to a small and mobile group was, but on existing networks and transnational practices of the General Eastern European Jewish migration and these in turn. In a broader conceptual methodological context is the question pursued, how are transmigration, transnational migration, diaspora and nationalization to each other. This is a a critical dialogue recorded with research discussions, promoting a shift from the nation-State paradigm as a research perspective since the 1990s, and on the other hand the attempt to make fertile the resulting conceptual considerations for Jewish history. The project is located in the area of Jewish studies, but in a close dialogue with the Eastern European history and the literature. Through the involvement of the research area of Jiddistik, which is so far mainly philological aligned in German-speaking countries, also interesting, that are innovative by tapping new source material for the research landscape in the German-speaking prospects in.
