Emulsion detectors provide by far the highest resolution lead of all particle detectors. There are many future projects that are made possible thanks to its unbeatable location and angular resolution, such as E.g. muon tomography for volcanoes and glaciers, antimatter measurements, as well as the search for dark matter with ultra fine grained photo emulsions. The development of emulsion detector technology is essential for the success of these applications. Based on my experience as a global expert in emulsion technology and also as one of the leading researchers in this area in Switzerland, I wants to build a research institution of international importance, with the aim to develop the next generation of emulsion detectors. The development of specific and tailor made emulsion detectors will open the way for a wide range of applications. Lay summary the particle physics has made together with the development of particle detectors great strides. Emulsion detectors by far offer the highest resolution of all detectors. There are many future projects that are possible due to its unbeatable location and angular resolution, such as E.g. muon tomography for volcanoes and glaciers, antimatter measurements and the search for dark matter with ultra fine grain emulsions. The development of emulsion detector technology is crucial to the success of these applications. Emulsion detectors and automated readout systems have been successfully applied in several neutrino experiments, such as CHORUS, DONuT, and OPERA (the latter with significant participation by Swiss researchers). Based on my experience as a global expert in emulsion technology and also as one of the leading researchers in this area in Switzerland, I wants to establish a research institution of international importance, with the aim to develop the next generation of emulsion detectors. I will use this new facility to a research programme for the development of special, specific applications to perform emulsions cut to. To meet the needs of the experiments, particularly in relation to the speed of the analysis of the emulsion, I intend also to develop the current automatic scanning microscope. The development of special, customized emulsion detectors will open the way to a wide range of applications. Conducting experimental studies, for example, studies on antimatter, muon tomography for the Swiss Alps, as well as medical applications, will provide new measured values of physics, scientific publications and the basis for future major projects on the basis of emulsion detectors.
