 Lead Lay summary In recent times, noncommutative geometry has yielded new and interesting insights into the study of geometric objects (like, but not restricted to compact complex manifolds). This is particularly true when it comes to index theory. The algebraic index theorem of Ryszard Nest and Boris Tsygan is a landmark result from this viewpoint.  
The work leading to the current project was a proof of a conjecture due to Boris Feigin, Andrei Losev and Boris Shoikhet. This conjecture stated that a certain (essentially algebraic) construction, via "topological quantum mechanics", of a linear functional on the top cohomology of a compact complex manifold amounts to integration over that manifold. The proof of this conjecture yielded a Lefschetz number theorem for an arbitrary holomorphic differential operator on a vector bundle over a complex compact manifold. This result together with the Nest-Tsygan algebraic index theorem implies the celebrated Hirzebruch-Riemann-Roch theorem. There is a different approach to this result from the one referred to in this summary. The latter approach is due to Markus Engeli and Giovanni Felder. When this Lefschetz number theorem is combined with a trace density construction due to Engeli-Felder, one obtains a result expressing the Lefschetz number of a holomorphic differential operator as the integral of a differential form about which there is some explicit understanding.  
It is an interesting problem to generalize the use of the topological quantum mechanics construction to understand other index (or more generally, Lefschetz number) theorems. Understanding index/Lefschetz number theorems for elliptic pairs (due to Pierre Schapira, Jean-Pierre Schneiders and Stephane Guillermou) in our framework is something we would like to do. One advantage of proofs coming from "topological quantum mechanics" seems to be that such proofs are very amenable to being combined with trace density type constructions, thereby giving results that are more explicit than the ones that were sought to be proven to start with. We also expect proofs from this approach to be considerably simpler than the original proofs. It is also likely that the current project would diversify in directions that we did not anticipate when we began: for instance, developing algebraic index theorems in new contexts. Other interesting problems/projects likely to diversify the current program are the Lefschetz number problem for algebraic differential operators on orbifolds (posed by Giovanni Felder and Xiang Tang) and studying the relation of this approach with that of Masaki Kashiwara and Pierre Schapira in their work on Deformation Quantization Modules.