 Lead Lay summary Studying the causes and consequences of DNA damage is a major topic of research within cancer biology. DNA damage not only causes cancer but is also used as a means to cure cancers through radio- or chemotherapy and is also responsible for the side effects of these treatments. DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) are the most cytotoxic DNA damage lesions induced by ionizing radiation and certain anti-cancer drugs, and appropriate responses to DSBs are therefore of prime importance. 
To preserve genomic integrity and survival, DSBs alarm the cellular DNA damage response (DDR) machinery, a multifaceted response orchestrated by the ATM and ATR kinase signaling pathways in mammalian cells. In response to genotoxic insults, ATM and ATR phosphorylate key substrates involved in DNA repair and cell-cycle control. The consensus target sequence for phosphorylation by ATM/ATR is serine or threonine followed by glutamine (S/T-Q). Notably, a recent large-scale proteomic analysis of proteins phosphorylated in response to DNA damage identified more than 900 phosphorylation sites in more than 700 proteins. In S and G2 phases of the cell cycle, DSBs are resected to produce single-stranded DNA triggering ATR activation and repair by homologous recombination (HR). 5' to 3' resection of DSB ends, a process that is still not understood in great detail, has been shown to be dependent on both ATM and CDK (cyclin dependent kinase) activities, but the targets of these kinases that are involved in DNA resection have not yet been identified. 
Human CtIP, an evolutionarily conserved protein, confers resistance to DSB-inducing agents and is recruited to DSB sites exclusively in S/G2. Although CtIP does not contain any known nuclease domains, it is intimately linked to DSB resection and is therefore required for efficient repair by HR and for ATR activation. CtIP becomes post-translationally modified in response to DNA damage, which is manifested by the appearance of a slow migrating form of CtIP and most likely due to ATM-mediated phosphorylation at S/T-Q sites. In addition, CtIP homologues from various species share a highly conserved motif at their respective C-termini, containing a putative CDK phosphorylation consensus site (S/T-P). To date, however, the potential roles of these CtIP phosphorylations in the DDR has not yet been addressed. 