 Lead Lay summary The research project aims to provide a historical account of how, between 1930 and 1960, 'peasants', an ambiguous social category, became a specific target for international social and economic reform. It examines the shifting terms in which, between the Great Depression and the Cold War, European and non-European governments and pressure groups addressed the issue of labour regulation in agriculture in international forums.  The working conditions of agricultural workers in developing countries, especially those of women and children, and the growing role of multinational corporations in financing, producing, and distributing agricultural products have long been at the forefront of international human rights' and environmentalist concerns. Yet, what is usually forgotten is that the economic, political and social necessity for reforming working conditions in agriculture, improving rural living standards and promoting rural development, already emerged as international issues in the interwar years. Outside the administration of international organisations, practically no reference is ever made to the cooperative efforts of international regulation before World War II, although in fact this was a crucial period for economic and social policy development.    The study will use the wide array of hitherto neglected published and unpublished outputs held by international organisations, such as the International Labour Organisation, the League of Nations and the Food and Agriculture Organisation and a range of transnational networks of scientific experts, agricultural cooperatives, philanthropic associations, activists and farmers.   On the basis of the collected evidence, the project will contextualise the international debate on agricultural labour, provide an account of the diplomatic, geopolitical and ideological framework in which it took place, and of its theoretical and practical outcomes. It will focus on how the discourse on agricultural labour was articulated in specific historical contexts, how it was appropriated by national governments and how, in selected cases, it translated locally into practical studies, welfare programs and governmental policies. The project will critically reviews ideas about ?peasant identity?, ?modernisation? and the ?rural-urban divide? formulated for public consumption and political effect.   The main objectives of this project will be to gain new insights of the interwar and postwar years, a formative but still under-researched period in the history of international relations and organisation, and to examine major themes in agricultural debates and their relation to current issues. The historical perspective on agricultural networks and organisations will provide an opportunity to investigate issues that have so far received little attention in an international context including the evolving social conditions in agriculture in the 1930s-1960s, the planning and implementation of agrarian reforms, and the shift from a Eurocentric approach to agricultural work to a global vision of rural development.   The project will offer a historical assessment of the shifting realities of agricultural labour in a period of intense global interaction and conflict and contribute significantly to the history of international organisation and cooperation and to the transnational and global histories of labour and agriculture.   