 Lead Lay summary Complex organisms, such as mammals, undergo numerous drastic morphological and physiological changes throughout their lifetime. The two extreme stages of this transformation are development (which starts with the single-celled zygote and ends with the establishment of the complete physiological functions of the adult organism) and aging (through which these physiological functions are progressively lost). Despite these striking external alterations, the genetic material that contains the necessary instructions for building the organism remains essentially the same throughout its lifetime and in all its different tissues. What changes, is the way that these instructions are interpreted by the cellular machineries: the activity of the genes differs between time-points, cells or tissues. In the same way, many phenotypic differences between species can be explained by differences in the gene activity, rather than by differences in the structure of the genes themselves.    The aim of my project is to improve our understanding of the underlying mechanisms of mammalian development and aging, by studying the patterns of gene activity throughout the lifetime of the organisms. I will focus on one particular class of genes, the long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs). These genes do not encode proteins, but nevertheless may play an important part in the cell, by modifying the level of activity of other genes. Unlike protein-coding genes, lncRNAs have not yet been studied in detail, and their precise functional roles, their modes of interaction with other genes and their contribution to developmental or aging-related traits are still largely unknown.    To attain this goal, I plan to study the patterns of gene activity with RNA-sequencing, a recently developed technology that allows a direct assessment of the repertoire of active genes (the transcriptome) in a biological sample, as well as a quantification of their relative activity levels.  I will use this technology to explore the transcriptomes of four major organs (brain, liver, lungs, testis), sampled during four time points representative of the entire life span of the organisms, for two model mammalian species: the mouse and the rat. I will then analyze this dataset with extensive computational methods to extract all relevant information for gene identification and quantification.    Thus, I hope to contribute to the current knowledge of mammalian long non-coding RNA repertoires and functional roles, by identifying genes that are active at specific time-points, in specific organs or species. Furthermore, by integrating the information available from all the different biological samples, it will be possible to predict potential functional interactions between long non-coding RNAs and other categories of genes. The evolutionary dimension of this study, given by the comparison of two different species, is particularly important, because it provides a first indication of the biological roles of the genes. For example, genes that have similar patterns of activity for the two species are likely to have important functional roles, given that their activity has been preserved through approximately 25 million of years of evolution.    The proposed project will likely lead to new insights into the underlying cellular mechanisms of development and aging, by elucidating the part played by long non-coding RNA genes in these intricate machineries. In the long term, the results of this work may prove to have practical implications for human health, namely for the study of developmental and aging-related pathologies.      