 Lead Lay summary The aim and purpose of this research project is to investigate the interplay between humor and emotion regulation. Both, humor as well as emotion-regulation are two complex and highly developed skills that incorporate emotional and cognitive processes. Humor and emotion-regulation overlap at least in two ways: First, the humorous response can be cognitively up- and down-regulated, second, humor can serve as emotion regulation strategy to manipulate the current emotional state. This research project aims to examine exactly these two phenomena.  
In the first research question, the malleability of exhilaration as the emotional response to humorous ambiguous stimuli is investigated with respect to bottom-up (stimuli characteristics) and top-down processes (cognitive appraisals). As stimulus characteristics, three film categories were chosen: harmless/humorous, mixed (humorous and repulsive), and repulsive (hostile/painful). The humor response is manipulated and by implicit and explicit instructions, which aims to bring the humor response under cognitive control (the focus is on the funny/absurd or the offensive/hostile/painful elements of the stimulus). Behavioral (ratings), psychophysiological (cardiovascular, electrodermal, respiratory) and neural correlates measured with functional brain imaging (fMRI) will be assessed. Specific behavioural, psychophysiological, and neural activations patterns are expected to be found.  
The second research question focuses on humor as a strategy to regulate negative emotions. Negative emotions will be induced with pictures and the participants will by instructed to use humor to down-regulate negative and up-regulate positive emotions in behavioural but also fMRI studies. Surprisingly, the neural correlates of active humor production have not been investigated yet. The neural correlates of down-regulating negative emotions with different types of humor and other reappraisal strategies might reveal processes that are not directly assessable by using rating scales only. In an already submitted paper, the differential effect of using a benevolent type of humor was shown to down-regulate negative emotions more effectively than a negative (aggressive, sarcastic) type of humor. In a following step, the benefit of humor has to be empirically differentiated from other forms of emotion regulation strategies. 
These two approaches will help to better understand the interplay between humor and emotion-regulation: the malleability of the emotional response to humorous stimuli and the beneficial consequences of humor as an emotion regulation strategy.