 Lead Lay summary The single-celled parasitic eukaryote Giardia lamblia has the physical appearance of a highly specialized organism with the capacity for directional swimming as well as tight attachment to substrates with its ventral organelle. In contrast, genomic and cell biological data reveal a very basic organization to the point that many researchers argue that the binucleate Giardia is a primitive and early-diverged eukaryote. With the sequencing of the complete genome and the use of more sophisticated in silico phylogenetic analyses, secondary reduction emerged as a more parsimonious explanation for this simple organization. Although this issue is not settled yet, Giardia has emerged as a unique model organism to study fundamental questions of cell biology mostly because organelles and machineries appear to be consistently minimized, which allows approaches that are not possible in other organisms.  
Exocytic as well as endocytic systems appear to be minimized and, most notably, the Golgi apparatus as the central organelle of membrane transport is missing in Giardia. Nevertheless, 3 organelle systems are clearly discernible: the endoplasmatic reticulum, mitosomes, and the so called peripheral vesicles (PVs), a densely packed layer of resident ~150 nm compartments which underlie the plasma membrane mostly on the dorsal side, but also in a specialized region of the ventral disk. PVs have been dubbed endosomal-lysosomal compartments based on localization of hydrolases, acidification and demonstrated accumulation of fluid phase markers. But how PVs actually take up cargo, "digest" and prepare this for further retrograde transport is not known. Recent work has established the fixed localization of PVs, a lack of lateral transport of endocytosed material and has revealed periodic opening of PVs to the environment as the mechanism by which soluble material gains access to the lumen of these organelles. This seems the major route of nutrient acquisition by this parasite. These data gave rise to the idea that PVs constitute a lysosome-derived, specialized organelle system which act as a buffer compartment that allows the parasite to sample the fluid phase of its natural environment in the small intestine. Biologically, this seems very intuitive, but raises several questions. My proposal revolves around 3 major questions based on a "kiss and flush, digest and sort" working model for PV function and organization: What machinery is responsible for establishing recurring continuities of PV lumen and extracellular space and how is it regulated? How are fluid phase and membrane endocytosis managed? What is the basis of PV organelle maintenance and division?