 Lead Lay summary Electronic devices currently go through a dramatic miniaturization. Their typical length scales and spatial dimensions are rapidly approaching the nanometer regime. Ultimately, the functionality of such tiny devices is likely to be determined by the quantum mechanical behavior of only a single or a few matter particles, like electrons and atoms, as well as light particles, also known as photons. These future electronic devices, which heavily exploit and rely on the laws of quantum physics, are expected to outmatch any currently known technologies in terms of speed, accuracy, and functionality. However, in order to facilitate scientific and technological progress towards their design, fabrication, and realization, a thorough theoretical understanding of the physics governing nano-scale quantum devices is urgently called for.  
In this project, we will study theoretically the physics of electrons, photons, and atoms in nano-scale quantum devices. The aim is to understand ongoing and future experiments as well as to propose and study novel experimental setups that will allow for experimental confirmation of the theoretical predictions that we will make. To this end, we plan to employ a variety of theoretical tools and concepts, including advanced analytical methods as well as numerical algorithms and computational schemes. The theoretical research will be centered around four central themes: coherent and controllable interactions, coherent light-matter interfaces, nano-engineered graphene devices, and electrical fluctuations in nano-scale devices. We expect that our theoretical research will proceed in close collaboration with experimentalists working on nano-scale quantum devices.  
The proposed research project will be important for the development of novel nano-scale quantum devices. The research will have an impact on future technologies as well as on our basic understanding of physics governing man-made structures at the nano-scale. The research project will be of relevance to a broad range of scientists, both in the applied and in the fundamental research communities. It is the hope that our research will stimulate additional research activities also among other physicists, theoretically as well as experimentally.    