 Lead Lay summary The present project will examine the concepts and practices of territory in Soviet Central Asia during the period of 1953-1982. It starts from the observation that the dynamics of territory in post-socialist transformation have been insufficiently explained and a-historically understood. With the disintegration of the Soviet Union in 1991, the five former Soviet republics of Central Asia became independent nation-states. An important part of the ensuing social, political and economic upheavals in these states comprised de-territorialisation and re-territorialisation processes, i.e., social processes were disconnected and re-connected to geographical places. However, the existing accounts of these processes are mostly prescriptive and teleological, and hence fail to explain underlying notions of territory. At the same time, the existing studies on the history of Soviet Central Asia have so far privileged the Stalin era, and provide only anecdotal insights into concepts and practices of territory during the later years of the Soviet Union from which post-socialist transformation departs. With the present project, I attempt to address this gap in research and examine territory in Soviet Central Asia during the Khrushchev (1953-1964) and Brezhnev (1964-1982) eras. I focus on the following main research question: What were the concepts and practices of territory during the Khrushchev and Brezhnev eras in Central Asia? For this project, I conceive of territory as a form of socially produced space, drawing on Henry Lefebvre's influential work. For this project, I adopt a case study design and explore three territorial configurations in Central Asia during the Khrushchev and Brezhnev eras: 1) Soviet republican borders; 2) collective and state farms; and 3) small towns. My methodology combines two major sources of historical evidence: 1) official records of the state accessed through archival research; and 2) personal memory accessed through oral history interviews. Data will be comprised of documentary material from the Central State Archives of Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan and Tajikistan, and selected interviewees' personal narratives related to the three case studies. I will use content, textual and discourse analysis to analyse and interpret data. The project contributes to the advancement of Political Geography by conceptually furthering engagement with its key concept territory. It contributes to Historical Geography by de-centring theorisation of modernity from a focus on the West with a study of Soviet modernity. Finally, it contributes to international efforts in studies of Soviet and Central Asian history to research the Khrushchev and Brezhnev eras.