 Lead Lay summary The physiological condition of deregulated endoplasmic reticulum (ER) homeostasis (?ER stress?) triggers a conserved unfolded protein response (UPR), which, as a primary output, aims at restoring ER function. As a secondary output, however, the UPR can also switch to promote apoptotic cell death. ER-stress-induced apoptosis in conjunction with accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) plays a pivotal role in a host of pathological conditions including neurodegenerative diseases and diabetes. However, the intracellular source of ROS is debated. In this project, we will examine different cell culture models for disease caused by folding stress in the ER with respect to subcellular redox changes and associated molecular pathways. We will also characterize the functional interactome of protein disulfide isomerase (PDI), which has emerged as a critical pro-survival factor in ER-stress-dependent pathologies. Furthermore, the translation of a hypothesized redox-dependent process in the ER into apoptotic calcium signals from ER to mitochondria will be studied.    To visualize redox changes at subcellular resolution in response to ER stress, we will use different fluorescent protein-based sensor proteins targeted to the ER, the mitochondria, or the cytosol. These sensors will be transfected into cell lines, which are inducible for the expression of misfolding-prone ER client proteins. These studies will enable us to track down the origin of intracellular oxidative stress/ROS production both at spatial and temporal resolution in several unrelated model systems for ER stress. Furthermore, by using inhibitors, knockdown, or overexpression of candidate machinery, this setup will be used to explore the mechanisms by which ER stress triggers cellular hyperoxidation. One of these mechanisms is likely provided by ER-stress-evoked calcium transmission from the ER to mitochondria through 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors (IP3R) transmembrane channels, which can impart and amplify an apoptotic signal. All types of IP3Rs comprise a conserved, potentially redox-regulated ER-luminal cysteine pair in their channel domain. Here, we study the cysteine pairs in IP3R type 1 and type 3. We have found evidence that the cysteine pair in IP3R1 is reduced, which is in contrast to the predominantly disulfide-bound state in IP3R3. We will next test the hypothesis that the redox state of these cysteines is regulated by ER stress and/or the activity of dedicated PDI family members, and whether this regulation influences apoptotic signaling. In addition, we have recently conducted a screen to identify mixed-disulfide binding partners of PDI. Although PDI is a known cytoprotective target of the UPR, knowledge on substrates of PDI is largely missing. In addition to a panel of candidate substrate proteins, which will now be further examined, we have also detected ER resident interaction partners. Defects in one of these, ER glucosidase II? (GII?), cause polycystic liver disease by decreasing the stability of polycystin calcium channels. We will therefore test, if PDI and the PDI?GII? interaction is required for the stability of polycystins.    Overall, the anticipated results are expected to enable a more profound comprehension of the processes that determine cell viability during physiological situations of stress. Such comprehension is of crucial importance and will aid the targeted treatment of diseases, which are linked to ER stress and intracellular oxidative damage.   