 Lead Lay summary Lay Summary: Immunological control of within-host S.  Typhimurium population dynamics     Background  The intestine is a major site of entry for disease-causing bacteria (for example Salmonella, Vibrio cholerae, Campylobacter). These infections cause extensive morbidity and mortality in the third world, as well as numerous infections in the developed world which can be life-threatening in the very young, very old, or in individuals with immune system deficiencies. Currently vaccination against these organisms is highly inefficient.     In a healthy person, multiple layers of protection exist in the intestine which allow us to live peacefully with the billions of ?friendly? bacteria that normally inhabit our intestines, whilst maintaining vigilance to invading pathogens. Intense study of the immune system in the intestine indicates that this peaceful vigilance is a highly active process and breakdown of this peaceful relationship results in inflammatory bowel diseases such as ulcerative colitis and Crohn?s disease. It remains unclear exactly how each component of the immune system is appropriately activated against disease-causing bacteria and restricts infection. Recent advances combining model infections with genetically tagged bacteria and mathematical modeling now allow us to quantify each stage of Salmonella infection in the mouse intestine in unprecedented detail and therefore to quantify the interaction between a model disease-causing bacterium and the intestinal immune system.     Questions  Is the failure of mucosal vaccines against Salmonella due to insufficient boosting of the immune system or an intrinsic weakness of the intestinal immune system against Salmonella infection?     Can we increase the efficacy of anti-Salmonella vaccination using the predications of our mathematical models? What do we predict will be the most important improvements in vaccine development?     How does the requirement for efficacious vaccination change in situations of genetic or induced immunodeficiency?     Methods  We have developed techniques, combining genetic tagging and stochastic modeling, to accurately quantify invasion rate, replication rate and killing rate of the model mucosal pathogen Salmonella Typhimurium in vivo . These techniques will be applied in vaccinated mice with a range of immunodeficiencies, in combination with state-of-the-art profiling of immune responses to produce an accurate model of mucosal immune protection. Mathematical modeling will be supported by a strong collaboration with the Institute of Theoretical Biology, ETH Zürich.     Expected results  This project will generate a very flexible quantitative model of the impact of host immunity on infection with Salmonella . From this model we will be able to predict how to most successfully vaccinate against Salmonella  infection and how best to protect highly susceptible individuals. Owing to the ability to independently discern bacterial replication rate, translocation rate and killing rate, and the comprehensive range of immune monitoring techniques employed, both the experiments to generate the mathematical model and the model itself can be easily extended to examine the role of individual drug targets (either molecules or cell types). It could also be easily extended to other bacterial pathogens and, using in vitro  systems, also into human biology.      