 Lead Lay summary Visual processing in the brain is traditionally thought of as a hierarchical, feed-forward process in which the analysis of simple features in primary visual areas is followed by that of more complex ones in higher-level areas. Even the processing of a simple visual image recruits a network of primary- and higher-level areas and gives rise to intricate interactions between them. Recent research suggests, for example, that higher-level visual areas exert influence over primary areas ones in the hierarchy. Several important questions remain unanswered about how visual areas work together, and about the direction of information flow between them. What brain areas exercise top-down influence, and at what latencies after the image onset? What are the most influential areas in the network of visual areas, and how does this change with time after image onset? Several higher-level areas show increased activity for highly specific tasks, like for example motion processing. Do these specialized areas only collect and process motion information, or do they actively influence other areas so as to stabilize the perceived image?  
To answer these questions, I will take a network approach that determines for each area what information it receives from others, and how this evolves in time. I will study the information flow in large-scale cerebral networks by combining functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and electrical source imaging based on high density EEG (ESI). From the source activity I will estimate the information flow between brain areas using multivariate Granger causality measures. This will distinguish the areas that predominantly drive activity in others from those that predominantly receive information, with a high temporal resolution.  
By showing how information is routed, this work is expected to provide a new view on the brain dynamics underlying visual perception. This will shed light on fundamental aspects of visual perception, like the relative contribution of top-down and bottom-up information flow and the nature of functional specialization in higher-level areas. The outcome of this project will open the door to a similar understanding of higher-level cognitive functioning and, eventually, of abnormal information flow in pathological states.