 Lead Lay summary Treatment for cancer in children and young adults has greatly improved and most patients are being cured. The disease and the intensive treatment, however, make them susceptible to late effects. More than 50% of survivors of childhood cancer suffer from late effects and many die from these. In addition, a substantial number of survivors suffer from psychological problems such as depression, anxiety, or post-traumatic stress. To detect and treat late effects as early as possible it is important that survivors continue to visit follow-up care long after they have been cured from the cancer. Various models of follow-up care have been described but so far none has been officially implemented in Switzerland. While follow-up care needs to be constantly updated according to the current status of research, it is also important that it is convenient for survivors to participate.  The aims of the project are: 1) to determine the advantages and disadvantages of follow-up care models as perceived by survivors, oncologists and family practitioners, 2) to compare their views and opinions, 3) to determine differences between survivors? perspectives depending on demographic, disease and individual characteristics, 4) to determine difference in follow-up attendance depending on survivors? previous experience of follow-up and transition of care, and 5) to describe changes in psychological distress in survivors.  We will send questionnaires to young cancer survivors to assess their opinions on currently used and desired optimal follow-up care. The sample will include childhood and young adult cancer survivors diagnosed between 1990 and 2007 aged under 25 years, who have survived for more than 5 years and who are currently aged 18 years and older. Parents of survivors who are currently aged 11-18 years will receive a separate similar questionnaire.Oncologists/haematologists, and family practitioners have already completed a questionnaire in 2011. Perspectives about the future organisation of follow-up care in Switzerland will then be compared. In addition, we will extract information from medical records on follow-up care that survivors received after treatment ended until late adolescence and on the transition survivors experienced.  Although various models for the organisation of follow-up care have been suggested, none has been systematically implemented in Switzerland. The project will provide the basis for the development of a standardised model of follow-up care for childhood cancer survivors in Switzerland in close collaboration with the Swiss Paediatric Oncology Group.