 Lead Lay summary Stroke poses a massive disease burden, but only few effective therapies exist yet. Intensive research effort has focused on the role of inflammation after cerebral ischemia because inflammation occurs for hours and even days after onset of ischemia, providing an extended window for therapy. However, therapeutic targeting of inflammation is hampered by the fact that processes are dynamic and interact in a complex and often multifaceted way. Techniques that would allow visualizing of such processes non-invasively would facilitate the development of therapies. To date, such techniques for use in experimental models and patients are not yet available.  Neutrophils can exert many different effects in the immune response following tissue injury and repair. Activated neutrophils can secrete substances, which can contribute to the breakdown of tissue barriers like the blood-brain barrier. Furthermore, neutrophils can extrude extracellular traps, which can serve as scaffold for fibrin and hence contribute to the formation of a thrombus. By exerting these actions, neutrophils could contribute to ischemic brain injury. Still, large gaps remain in the understanding on how these actions engage in the evolution of the ischemic injury and how they are involved in blood-brain barrier (BBB) impairment, hemorrhagic transformation (HT) and thrombosis.  The object of the project is to address these questions using non-invasive imaging techniques such as near-infrared fluorescence (NIRF) imaging and magnetic resonance imaging with dedicated imaging probes, experimental models of cerebral ischemia, genetic mouse models and pharmacology to bridge the gap in knowledge on how neutrophils mediate blood-brain barrier impairment, hemorrhagic transformation and thrombosis after focal cerebral ischemia. For this purpose, imaging assays for visualizing neutrophil proteolysis, adhesion and thrombus formation will be developed and validated. The combined use of imaging modalities and multiple imaging probes will enable to investigate several processes relevant for BBB impairment, HT and thrombosis and their interaction in-vivo in a mouse model of cerebral ischemia. Imaging will be employed to test new therapies for application together with thrombolytic therapy with recombinant tissue plasminogen activator and to guide the application of this therapy. The aim is to make thrombolysis safer and more applicable.