 Lead Lay summary Background: Social interactions form an integral part of human life. Impairments in social behaviour lead to decreased quality of life and are often associated with mental disorders. In direct human social interaction the face plays an integral role. The human face is a complex three-dimensional object type of high social and biological relevance. Because of this relevance human beings have obtained a distinguished expertise to recognize faces and to interpret socially relevant cues they transmit.  
Context: Most of the research on social perspectives of faces has so far been concerned with negative aspects of communication (e.g., fear, disgust). The suggested work concentrates on pro-social aspects of personal interactions. I propose here to investigate the psychological processes and neurobiological underpinnings of pro-social behaviour. I will look at processing styles and how they relate to emotion detection, eye gaze processing and cuteness judgements.  
Aim: The presented project will bring together research on social aspects of face perception, such as eye gaze perception, emotional expression, attractiveness and trustworthiness, and their biological underpinnings. The primary scientific aim of the proposed research is to characterize the inter-relationship of the psychological and hormonal state of individuals and the interpretation of socially relevant cues in faces. Taken together, the suggested experiments will shed light on cognitive processes involved in social perception and behaviour, which in turn will have implications for clinical psychology and psychiatry, since for example dysfunction of eye gaze processing is a core symptom of autism and schizophrenia. The findings will help to understand the underlying processes of social cognition and will serve diagnostics and early detection of social disorders such as autism and social phobia.  
Methods: I will use behavioural experimental designs, as well as fMRI and clinical placebo controlled double-blind designs to study the use of social cues in faces in the context of pro-social interactions. 