 Lead Lay summary The formation of relief in mountains comes from the complex interact between tectonic forcing of the lithosphere (tectonics which drives rocks motion), and atmospheric processes (climate), that affect erosion, which in turn removes material inhomogeneously from a mountain belt. Landscape is at the interface, and the topography evolves depending on the conditions of climate, tectonics, and erosion. In this project I work on the importance of the relative contribution of the tectonic and the climate to create relief in mountain ranges. 
During the Plio-Quaternary (since ~5Ma), the climate became progressively colder and potentially more erosive, with glaciers periodically covering large parts of the northern hemisphere high-latitude/ high-altitude areas. The effects of these climate changes on mountain building have been studied in detail since a couple of decades. However, because glacial erosion are less well understood than fluvial erosion, the role and importance of glacial erosion in shaping landscapes and in changing relief is still disputed. Specifically, the onset, the timing and the importance of glacial valley carving in alpine region is still largely unknown.  The present project focuses on two natural laboratories that present extreme topography, with different precipitation and glaciers that shape the landscape. They are 1) the St Elias Range in Alaska, where tectonic forcing is high, with a high erosion rate affected by fastmoving temperate glaciers, and 2) the Western and Central Alps, where tectonic forcing is slow, with a moderate glacier cover today, but was almost complete during glacial advances. These areas also show contrasting precipitation gradients, with a spatial variation up to a factor of 20 in the St Elias Range, and only threefold in the Alps. 
To achieve this study, I rely on three independent methods, that all aim to derive a 
complete history of relief formation and glacial valley carving in response to climatic and 
tectonic changes: 
1) Terrestrial Cosmogenic Nuclide (TCN) concentrations in rock and sediments to 
document the time necessary to erode the upper ~2 meter of rock. In-situ and watershed averaged erosion rates will be quantified, over typical timescales of 500 yrs to 5 kyrs. 
2) A new very-low thermochronometer based on Optically Stimulated Luminescence 
(OSL) dating, with an exceptionally low closure temperature (30°C ? 40°C) has been used to document the latest cooling event, in the upper ~1km of crust, and therefore quantify valley carving and relief evolution over typical a timescale of 50 kyrs to 500 kyrs.. 
3) Numerical modelling of fluvioglacial landscape evolution, parameterized with 
existing and acquired data, will document the erosion behaviour of studied ranges under variable external and internal forcing. Numerical models provided a quantitative and self-consistent scenario for Quaternary relief development and the role of glaciations, and show that glacial erosion lead to dramatic relief increase at valleyscale.