 Lead Lay summary The development of cholangiocarcinoma (CC) is know to be related to chronic inflammation of the bile ducts. This project determines the role of inflammation induced anti-apoptotic myeloid cell leukemia sequence 1 (Mcl-1) signaling for CC cell proliferation and the role of the tumor stroma in this process. It examines pharmacotherapeutic strategies to induce apoptosis in carcinoma cells and tumor-supporting cells of the sourrounding microenvironment. Cholangiocarcinoma is a devastating neoplasm of the biliary system. It is associated with chronic inflammatory diseases of the biliary tract, especially primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) with 10-15% of PSC patients developing cholangiocarcinoma. Besides their invasive growth, cholangiocarcinomas are known to induce a strong desmoplastic reaction and contain an abundant, scirrhous tumor stroma with carcinoma associated fibroblasts (CAF) and hepatic stellate cells being the most prominent stromal cell types. Just recently the association between extend of stromal tissue and cholangiocarcinoma progression as well as overall prognosis has been demonstrated. 
TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL), which uniquely induces apoptosis in malignant cells and, therefore, is a potent tumor suppressor, is paradoxically expressed by cholangiocarcinoma cells indicating a failure of its pro-apoptotic signaling pathway in this cancer. Furthermore, Mcl-1, an anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 protein which is also overexpressed in cholangiocarcinoma cells potently blocks TRAIL cytotoxicity. 
Mcl-1 (Myeloid cell leukemia sequence 1) is a pivotal anti-apoptotic protein upregulated in cholangiocarcinoma, and has also been strongly implicated in tumorigenesis. Likewise stomal cells have been described to exert anti-apoptotic effects and alterations of Mcl-1 and other anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 proteins in tumor stroma cells are currently under investigation. Preliminary data indicate, that activated fibroblast from the tumor stroma are sensible to apoptosis induced by small molecule Bcl-2 inhibitors. The human Mcl-1 gene is located on chromosome 1q21 and encodes a protein of 350 amino acids (36 kDa). The half-life of Mcl-1 protein can be regulated by phosphorylation.  Thus, Mcl-1 is a highly regulated protein by both transcriptional and post-translational processes, both of which remain incompletely understood. 
Although CC cells are TRAIL-resistant, it has also been reported that silencing Mcl-1 in these cells renders them sensitive to TRAIL cytotoxicity. Inhibition of Mcl-1 protein function should therefore result in TRAIL-mediated tumor regression. Tumor promoting CAF themselves are thought to overexpress anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 proteins required to prevent activation-induced cell death in this distinct cell type. 
This project will determine whether Mcl-1 expression and function can be inhibited in vivo. It will furthermore answer the question whether inhibition of Mcl-1 protein expression/function induces acute cholangiocarcinoma cell death. Moreover it will be examined if carcinoma associated fibroblasts display alterations in Bcl-2 family protein expression and whether CAF are selectively sensitive to Mcl-1 inhibition. 
A pharmacologic approach will be employed to inhibit Mcl-1 expression and function in an established animal models for cholangiocarcinoma. 
The results of this project have a direct implication for further clinical research projects. Furthermore pharmacological inhibition of Mcl-1 and restoration of TRAIL-signaling of the tumor, as well as characterization and modulation of tumor-stroma components with subsequent tumor cell apoptosis represent a new therapeutic strategy to attack devastating tumors such as cholangiocarcinoma. As the tumor stroma is a considerably less variable therapeutic target than the actual tumor, this approach may even be of much broader interest for various other tumor entities