 Lead Lay summary     Every person will most certainly have a chance, at least once in their lives, to contemplate a starry night sky like that shown in the figure below and perhaps ask themselves, "How do the stars die"? The most modern telescopes deliver to astronomers stunning images of stars in our Galaxy and beyond, with incredible detail, but the same basic question still remains.  In my Ambizione research I will study how massive stars evolve and die. These stars are easily outnumbered by their low-­mass siblings like our Sun, but the impact of massive stars through cosmic time is far from negligible, as they are essential constituents of a stellar population. Massive stars are the main responsible for the input of ionizing photons, energy, and recycling mass into the interstellar medium through stellar winds and when they dramatically explode as a Supernova (SN).  Our current understanding of massive stars is very limited, and one of the main reasons for our limited knowledge is the presence of a dense stellar wind which progressively hides more and more of the stellar surface from our direct view as the star evolves. Since current evolutionary models do not treat physical mechanisms happening at the atmosphere and wind, model predictions of the evolution of massive stars are difficult to be directly compared to observed quantities.  To understand how massive stars reach the end stages of their lives, I will couple stellar evolutionary calculations to radiative transfer models of the stellar atmosphere and wind, producing unified models of massive stars. Essentially, the atmospheric models will act as an interpreter, translating the physical quantities predicted by the stellar evolution to the language of the observations.  This will produce a unique database of state-­of-­the-­art unified models of massive stars, ranging from the interior through the envelope up to the stellar wind, with a degree of realism never reached before. This database of unified models will have strong impact and be applicable to many long-­standing problems in Astrophysics in general, such as the nature of Population III stars, the reionization of the Universe, massive star populations in distant galaxies, the appearance of SN progenitors just before exploding, and the evolution of chemically-­homogenous stars. The latter are the most likely progenitors of long-­duration Gamma Ray Bursts, one of the most energetic explosions in the Universe.