 Lead Lay summary A number of chemicals, which we are exposed to on an every day basis, are known to interfere with our hormonal systems, a phenomenon known as endocrine disruption. One system particularly prone to endocrine disruption is the estrogen system that regulates the biological response to the female sex hormone estrogen (E2). The consequences of this interference are unclear, however, epidemiologic studies have demonstrated correlations between exposure to endocrine disruptive chemicals and diseases such as cancer and metabolic disorders. Some chemicals have been shown to induce epigenetic changes, i.e. changes that are inheritable but are not determined by the DNA sequence. There are different ways of coding epigenetic information. One of them is methylation of DNA at the DNA base cytosine in cytosine-guanine pairs (CpGs). CpGs are often found in clusters called CpG islands. In general, methylation of CpG islands in regulatory regions of a gene leads to shut down of the respective gene, while unmethylated CpG islands permit the transcription of this gene. However, there are indications that also single CpGs can regulate gene expression. How the methylation pattern of single CpGs is changed and how exactly these changes affect gene expression is not known.  
The aim of this project is to investigate if the estrogen receptors can affect the methylation pattern of E2-regulated genes and if chemicals that interfere with E2 signalling can change these patterns. In preliminary experiments, we could show that the estrogen receptor beta (ERbeta) but not estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) is involved in demetylation of single CpGs in two E2-regulated genes by directly binding to the regulatory region of these genes. Decrease in methylation lead to diminished gene transcription. This indicates that at least ERbeta can regulate gene transcription by changing the epigenetic code. In this project, we will investigate the molecular mechanisms behind this novel function of ERbeta and how environmental chemicals can affect this. Furthermore, we will try to link the observed changes in DNA mehtylation and gene transcription to effects described after exposure to these chemicals.  
With this project we hope to contribute to understand how exposure to chemicals is involved in the onset of diseases like cancer and metabolic disorders. In addition, by investigate the molecular mechanisms behind DNA-demethylation of single CpGs, we hope to contribute to understand how DNA methylation is regulated and changed, processes that are far from understood.