 Lead Lay summary In Southern Africa, where HIV-infection is common, AIDS-defining cancers are an important public health problem. With the scale-up of combination antiretroviral therapy in Africa, the prognosis of individuals living with HIV/AIDS has improved substantially. However, the burden of cancer in the HIV-infected population and the implications for treatment and outcomes in the era of combination antiretroviral therapy are unclear.  In the proposed project, I will investigate the epidemiology and care of AIDS-defining cancers (i.e. Kaposi sarcoma, non-Hodgkin?s lymphoma and invasive cervical cancer) and non AIDS-defining cancers. Specifically, I aim to i) define the incidence and prognosis of cancer in HIV-infected patients starting antiretroviral therapy in Southern Africa, ii) identify factors that influence the occurrence of and survival from cancer, iii) examine the provision of health care to HIV-infected persons developing cancer, including prevention, screening, diagnostic procedures and anti-cancer treatment provided. Results will be compared to the current situation for HIV-infected cancer patients in Europe and North America.  This study will build on a large network of HIV cohort studies, the International epidemiological Databases to Evaluate AIDS in Southern Africa (IeDEA-SA), the North American AIDS Cohort Collaboration on Research and Design (NA-ACCORD), the Collaboration of Observational HIV Epidemiological Research Europe (COHERE) and the National Cancer Registry in Johannesburg, South Africa. The analyses will be based on more than 30 collaborating cohorts contributing data on more than 300,000 HIV-infected persons from Southern Africa; 70,000 HIV-infected persons from Europe and about 100,000 HIV-infected persons from North America.   The planned research responds to the operational and clinical research priorities identified by the World Health Organization and the United Nations resolution on non-communicable diseases. The project builds on high-profile international research networks and will provide guidance about improving cancer prevention and care in HIV-infected persons in Southern Africa, Europe and North America.