 Lead Lay summary Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) has been increasing along with the obesity epidemic. How NAFLD damages liver functions needs to be clearly understood. This research project will address this issue in mouse and human by both molecular and nutritional approaches.  
The prevalence of NAFLD is getting higher in a general population because of obesity epidemics. This disease consists a wide spectrum of liver diseases, fatty liver, steatohepatitis, and cirrhosis. It is critical to treat NAFLD at an early stage, since the progression from steatohepatitis (NASH) into cirrhosis is not reversible. However it is difficult to detect NAFLD at the early stage, since it frequently occurs in obese but otherwise "healthy" individuals. In addition, the primary metabolic abnormality switching fatty liver to NASH is still unclear. Patients with NAFLD frequently develop insulin resistance, a hallmark of the metabolic syndromes. It is postulated that lipid types in the liver have an importance in inducing insulin resistance. However how insulin resistance develops in patients with NAFLD is not yet clearly understood. We will try to find new molecular pathways involved in the development of insulin resistance in NAFLD.  
To find a mechanism of insulin resistance induced in NAFLD, the project will address several aspects that could potentially modify hepatic insulin resistance; 1) a pathway related to immune function, 2) some genes which modify lipid formation in the liver. These pathways will be studies in mouse and in human model of NAFLD. Thirdly, the effect of dietary protein on NAFLD will be also investigated as a nutritional approach.  
Actually the cause of insulin resistance in NAFLD patients has not been clearly identified. This research project will propose several new hypotheses, which had never been addressed before, 1) a role of immune function, and 2) a role of lipid droplets in the liver. These two aspects may create new and independent targets for the treatment of NAFLD, regarding to the disease progression to NASH and also its relationship to insulin resistance. Lastly, the 3rd part of the study may be a useful dietary approach to treat NAFLD at the early stage.