 Lead Lay summary Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia, affecting an estimated 102'000 individuals in Switzerland alone. One major goal in AD research is to identify the disease in its earliest possible stage. Early detection would allow clinicians to begin treatment delaying disease progression at a timepoint when it will have the maximal benefit. Currently, memory dysfunction is considered the earliest cognitive marker of AD (i.e. amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment or aMCI). Correspondingly, atrophy of the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus - two structures essential for memory functioning - also indicates incipient AD. However, Alzheimer neurofibrillary pathology starts neither in the entorhinal cortex nor the hippocampus, but in the neighbouring "transentorhinal cortex". Only after neurofibrillary pathology has compromised this region does it enter the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus. We therefore hypothesize that behavioral and structural measures of the transentorhinal cortex detect AD earlier than is currently possible.  
The goals of the present proposal are to identify early markers of AD by assessing the functional and structural integrity of the transentorhinal cortex in healthy individuals and patients with aMCI and early AD. Study 1 will present three behavioral experimental tasks of transentorhinal cortex functioning and standard neuropsychological tests to groups of healthy participants and patients with aMCI and AD. All participants will also receive anatomic magnetic resonance imaging scans. We will determine whether behavioral and brain imaging measures of transentorhinal cortex integrity are impaired in patients relative to the control participants. Study 2 will assess all participants with the same measures one year later, when a portion of the aMCI patients will have progressed to AD. We will chart the evolution of functional and structural impairments in the patients, and identify those baseline measures which most accurately predicted which predementia patients progressed to AD. Finally, study 3 will examine existing diffusion tensor imaging data to determine the patterns of white matter connectivity with the transentorhinal cortex, thereby generating novel hypotheses regarding its function, and we will determine how white matter connectivity in aMCI and AD patients is degraded as a function of disease stage.  
We hope that this research will provide novel insights into the functional-neuroanatomic architecture of this understudied region critical to the beginning stage of AD, and in doing so, significantly improve our ability to detect and consequently treat patients with incipient AD.