 Lead Lay summary The aim of this project is to investigate the Paleogene phosphate sequences in order to trace thermal changes and perturbations in the carbon cycle in low latitude shallow deposits via geochemical analyses of sediments and vertebrate fossils. The obtained data are evaluated in terms of palaeo-environmental conditions, palaeo-oceanography and palaeo-climate.  
A widespread, extreme climatic warming appeared about 55 million years ago in the Paleogene (PETM - Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum). One of the strongest signals describing this event is the large negative shift in the marine oxygen isotope record. The PETM is also associated with a negative 2.5-6 ? carbon isotope excursion (CIE), which is generally accepted to reflect the geologically rapid injection of a large mass of 12C-enriched carbon into the ocean/atmosphere system. The primary source of this carbon has been attributed to dissociation of methane hydrate released from seafloor sediments, further enhancing global warming. The PETM is the closest greenhouse period to modern time and in many ways it represents a natural experiment analogous to the modern anthropogenic situation, therefore the characteristics and mechanisms of this global event are under intensive study.  
Our project investigates Paleogene climatic and environmental conditions and the research is a follow-up of previous results from Tunisian phosphate beds that gave an interesting and in some ways unexpected result (Ounis et al., 2008). Here the marine phosphate remains reveal a large CIE at about 55Ma, but without any shift in the oxygen isotope values. The absence of any temperature anomaly in the Tunisian sections was initially interpreted as reflecting the low latitude position and the shallow, semi-closed condition of the basin. However, it is unclear whether this CIE really links to the PETM or it is rather a local signal of the region.  
The Tunisian layers are part of the giant Tethys-Caribbean phosphorite belt which deposited during the late Cretaceous-Eocene. It provides a good example of a widespread shallow marine environment at low latitude and many other regions can be sampled in order to test whether the observed isotope signal in Tunisia is unique or can be traced globally. If similar climate signal is widely recognized at other phosphorite localities, then the magnitude of the global warming at low latitude should be reconsidered, hence in a wider context the data might help to better understand modern climate changes as well.