 Lead Lay summary Structure-function studies of heterodimeric ABC transporters   ABC transporters belong to one of the largest transporter families and are found in all living organisms. They use the energy from binding and hydrolysis of ATP to shuttle a wide variety of substrates across the membrane. More than 40 different ABC transporters are found in the human body, many of which fulfilling essential functions. One of the best studied human ABC transporters is CFTR. Mutations in the gene encoding this protein are associated with one of the most common hereditary diseases, cystic fibrosis. Yet, other ABC transporters as for example human P-glycoprotein and many bacterial homologues actively extrude drugs, and thereby contribute to the development of multidrug resistance in cancers and pathogenic microorganisms. This causes severe problems in the treatment of bacterial infections and chemotherapy.  Despite their chief importance in biology and medicine, current knowledge of ABC transporter structure and function remains limited, mainly due to the challenges in solving crystal structures of these intrinsically flexible membrane proteins.  We recently succeeded to solve the crystal structure of a novel ABC transporter named TM287/288, which originates from the thermophilic bacterium Thermotoga maritima . TM287/288 was crystallized in its inward-facing state and therefore complements previously determined high resolution structures of outward-facing ABC transporters. In addition to the fact, that the TM287/288 structure was solved at the excellent resolution of 2.9 Å, it reveals important novel features. In contrast to other inward-facing ABC transporter structures, the ATP binding domains are in contact. Since TM287/288 consists of two different polypeptide chains which form a heterodimeric assembly, the transporter is asymmetric. This is interesting because about half of the 40 human ABC transporters (of which the structures are currently not known) are heterodimers including the above mentioned clinically important CFTR.  Crystal structures provide highly accurate snapshots of the proteins under study, but are themselves not sufficient to fully understand the transport mechanism. Therefore, we combine X-ray crystallography with complementary biophysical and biochemical methods. Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy and single molecule FRET are used to study the conformational cycling of the membrane transporters both in detergent solution as well as in lipid membranes. Engineered disulfide cross-links and targeted mutations are introduced to trap ABC transporters in alternate conformational states in order to further study these states in terms of structure and biochemical properties. Biochemical analyses include drug and nucleotide binding assays on purified transporters using scintillation proximity assay (SPA) as well as transport assays in intact cells. Based on the complementary insights gained from these combined approaches, structure-function relationships are established which ultimately shed light on the transport mechanism at a molecular level.  In addition, we use in vitro  selected binding proteins such as designed ankyrin repeat proteins (DARPins) to study membrane transporters in unexplored ways. Such binders serve as crystallization aids and have been shown to trap specific conformational states of otherwise intrinsically flexible transporters. They can be used as affinity reagents to study and manipulate properties of membrane proteins embedded in their native lipid bilayer. As a long-term goal, we aim to generate binding proteins that inhibit multidrug transport in pathogenic bacteria and in cancer cells.   