 Lead Lay summary Our intestines are home to an immense load of non-pathogenic commensal bacteria that outnumber our own body's eukaryotic cells by ten fold. Despite the presence of these 'foreign' organisms the intestinal immune system does not mount an inflammatory response against the commensal flora. Instead, a state of armed truce between the microflora and the intestinal immune system is established. We have co-evolved to live in healthy mutualism with our intestinal flora which means that both, we as hosts as well as the bacteria that live in our intestines profit from this situation. For example, while we provide the bacteria with a nutrient rich environment, the bacteria in turn help us to digest compounds that would otherwise be unaccessible to us. While this homeostasis is stably maintained in healthy individuals, a breakdown can trigger inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), which is a chronic condition that is thought to be due to an inappropriate and exaggerated mucosal immune response to normal constituents of the commensal microflora.

T helper type 1 (Th1) responses are mounted in response to viral or bacterial infection while Th2 responses are involved in allergic diseases and in responses to parasites such as helminths. The more recently described Th17 cells are involved in autoimmune responses but may play an important role in keeping the intestinal flora in check. Another important T helper cell lineage are regulatory T cells (Treg) that control or down-modulate immune responses. This research project will address how intestinal Treg induce and maintain intestinal immune homeostasis by controlling inappropriate Th1, Th2, and Th17 against intestinal bacteria to avoid detrimental inflammatory immune responses in the absence of pathogens. In particular, this research proposal will investigate how intestinal Treg sense the presence of harmless intestinal commensal bacteria.

Understanding the fundamental mechanisms that lead to induction and maintenance of intestinal immune homeostasis in response to intestinal colonization with commensal bacteria is crucial for understanding the defects in homeostasis that must occur in the initiation of IBD. Elucidating the mechanism by which Treg control and regulate intestinal immune responses in the absence of pathogens might lead to the development of new therapeutic approaches to treat or even reverse chronic intestinal inflammation.