 Lead Lay summary Although psychological treatments for mental disorders have displayed effectiveness in numerous studies, the results also suggest that these treatments fail to attain clinically relevant changes in a significant proportion of patients. Therefore, new interventions, which can be integrated into empirically validated treatments, are needed in order to target factors relevant for the maintenance of mental disorders. In recent years, evidence has demonstrated that deficits in general emotion-regulation skills (i.e. skills that are important for coping with a broad range of negative affects) contribute significantly to the development and maintenance of mental-health problems (e.g., Berking, Orth, Wupperman, Meier,  Caspar, in press). In response, the ?Training Emotionaler Kompetenzen? (TEK; Berking 2007) was developed. This non-disorder-specific and group-based intervention is designed to enhance effective emotion-regulation skills in individuals who suffer from mental disorders or are at risk of developing mental-health problems. Preliminary evidence suggests that integrating this training into inpatient cognitive-behavioral therapy improves treatment outcome (Berking et al., in press). Moreover, the training has been shown to improve emotion-regulation skills in at-risk populations (Berking, Wupperman,  Meier, submitted). However, at this point, the effectiveness of the training as an adjunctive intervention has not yet been investigated in a randomized controlled study in a clinical sample. Thus, the main goal of the proposed research project is to test the hypothesis that adding the original group-based version of the training to individual psychotherapeutic outpatient treatment enhances treatment outcome. The second goal of the proposed study is to test the effectiveness of a modified version of the training which can be applied exclusively in individual therapy (TEK-IT) and is therefore easier to disseminate in settings providing treatment for smaller numbers of patients. In order to attain these goals, a two-stage randomized controlled study is planned. In each stage, 80 patients will be randomly assigned to either a control condition or an experimental condition. In each stage, patients in the control condition will be treated with individual integrated psychotherapy (IP) according to Grawe (1998, 2004). In stage 1, patients in the experimental condition will receive the original group-based TEK in addition to individual IP. In stage 2, patients in the experimental condition will receive individual IP ?enriched? with TEK-IT.