 Lead Lay summary Today?s clinical practise goes in direction of early disease detection with the goal of prevention instead of expensive treatment, to minimise patient distress and reduce health care cost. Medical imaging is at the pulse of this development, and it is growingly perceived that multimodal imaging combining the merits of different techniques is the key to more accurate diagnosis and patient-tailored therapy.  Among the various modalities, ultrasound is low-cost and non-ionising, and real-time and free-hand operation makes it easy to quickly access different parts of the body. Therefore ultrasound is well established in human medicine. In spite of its great potential, however, the greyscale image provided by ultrasound does often not allow accurate distinction of different disease types which then make subsequent use of CT/MRI mandatory.  My vision is therefore the advancement of ultrasound far beyond the state-of-the-art, augmenting conventional ultrasound with novel ultrasound-based contrast modes to a multi-modal imaging facility in its own right. This will unify the virtues of real-time operability and patient safety with the diagnostic accuracy of combined imaging. Within this project, I will address a key point to this development, the knowledge of the local sound speed inside the tissue. To date, sound speed is assumed constant when imaging the human body using ultrasound, although in reality sound speed varies on the order of few percents between different tissue types. As a consequence, current ultrasound imaging is inaccurate and often renders deep imaging difficult.  Within this Ambizione project, I will therefore develop a novel method that allows imaging the sound speed with high contrast and high resolution for integration with conventional clinical ultrasound: Computerised Ultrasound Tomography in Echo Mode - CUTE. This will resolve two current shortcomings of ultrasound in two ways at the same time: Knowing the sound speed will allow more accurate image reconstruction and will directly benefit diagnostics and ultrasound-assisted interventions. In addition, sound speed provides a novel diagnostic modality in its own right! Because disease influences sound speed, an image of the local sound speed will allow more accurate diagnosis of disease type and margins than it is possible today, and replace X-ray, MRI, and CT in many situations.  Within the Ambizione project, the advantages of CUTE will be demonstrated based on a research ultrasound scanner, and the method will be further investigated and developed to clinical applicability. First clinical pilot studies will confirm contrast and resolution in cancer and liver diseases, and, in addition to that, the potential of CUTE for temperature monitoring in high intensity focused ultrasound treatment of cancer will be investigated. Upon completion, further integration of CUTE with US-based modalities such as photoacoustic imaging and shear wave elastography will result in high diagnostic accuracy multimodal ultrasound imaging. In summary this project will benefit clinical practise and potentially the welfare of millions of patients. 