 Lead Lay summary It is one of the fundamental questions in differential geometry to study which structures can be put on various differentiable manifolds. For example, which manifolds admit an affine, or a locally symmetric structure, or a vector bundle with special properties. These possible structures can be studied using characteristic classes.  
For the study of bundles admitting a connection with vanishing curvature, and in turn for the study of flat or affine manifolds, the Euler class furnishes the first example of a nontrivial primary characteristic class. Despite being one of the most basic characteristic classes, many interesting open questions about the Euler class remain to be answered. In its simplest form, namely evaluated on the tangent bundle of the manifold, the Euler class is nothing else than the Euler characteristic. A famous conjecture of Chern which we will address in this research program and which I was, in a joint work with Tsachik Gelander, able to prove for some classes of manifolds, states that a closed affine manifold always has vanishing Euler characteristic. A typical way to solve such a question, is through so called Milnor-Wood inequalities, which give an inequality between Euler class of flat bundles and the Euler characteristic.  
In this research program, I propose to find generalizations of Milnor-Wood inequalities, named after Milnor and Wood's seminal inequalities and also studied by Sullivan. These inequalities give upper bounds on some invariant of bundles (e.g. the Euler number, the signature, characteristic numbers) in terms of some invariant of the base space (typically the Euler characteristic). I plan to follow Gromov's suggested approach through bounded cohomology, relying on techniques which I have developed in my previous work. Along the way, I will need to find good explicit cocycles representing the different characteristic classes in consideration, and to study further Gromov's simplicial volume invariant. The behavior of this relatively new invariant under simple operations such as taking products or fiber bundle is still mysterious and deserves attention for its applications to polyhedral combinatorics and the Chern Conjecture.