 Lead Lay summary                 Obesity affects around 300 million individuals worldwide with a prevalence of 20% in developing countries. These numbers are expected to continually grow in the next years, making obesity consequences a priority in health expenses. Overweight and obesity are considered to be major risk factors for development of the metabolic syndrome. Metabolic syndrome refers to the clustering of abdominal obesity, insulin resistance, elevated blood pressure, hyperglycemia and dyslipidemia. The prevalence of metabolic syndrome increases rapidly, leading to higher morbidity and mortality due to heart attack, stroke, and renal failure.  During the last few years, a growing number of observations placed the mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) as a central player in the appearance of metabolic syndrome. In adipocytes, MR can bind two types of hormones, aldosterone and glucocorticoids. It was shown that MR expression is induced during adipose conversion and conversely, MR knock-down prevents adipocytes differentiation in vitro. Therefore, the precise role of MR in the adipogenic process needs to be clarified in animals to start the discrimination between the roles of MR and the close homologue glucocorticoid receptor (GR) in the adipose tissue formation and function.  Furthermore, adipose tissue is now recognized as a dynamic endocrine organ that secretes a variety of factors named adipokines. To date, more than 100 adipokines have been identified but their functions remain largely unknown. It was also shown that some adipokines stimulate adrenocortical aldosterone secretion, that may lead to increased renal salt reabsorption and finally to the obesity-related hypertension. These observations suggest the existence of a regulatory loop between adipose tissue and adrenal glands. Therefore, we would like to clarify the involvement of adipocyte MR signaling in this regulatory loop to better understand the link between obesity and hypertension. Given that aldosterone and glucocorticoids promote adipose tissue formation, we hypothesize that aldosterone and glucocorticoids hormones via MR could also stimulate adipokines secretion.  Objectives :  1.            To elucidate in mice the functional role of MR in the control of adipocyte tissue metabolism by using pharmacological and genetic approaches. Mice with targeted inactivation of MR gene in adipocytes will be generated and analyzed for the impact of MR loss on adipose tissue formation. In parallel, new non-steroidal MR blockers will be used in different mouse models fed with different challenging diets (high glucose, high fat?) to confirm the specific role of MR in adipocytes, and to identify new potential therapeutics.  2.            To identify molecular mechanisms by which MR signaling may control adipocytes differentiation and function. On one hand, we want to identify the MR regulated genes involved in adipocytes differentiation and metabolism by micro-array analysis. On the other hand, we want to identify MR interacting partners in adipocytes cells by MALDI-TOF experiments.