 Lead Lay summary Background: 
Important decisions such as hiring or promoting employees usually depend on high-power people's perceptions and judgments about their employees. Because high-power people have, by definition, influence over others, it is especially important that their judgments are unbiased. However, research showed that high-power people are even more biased than low-power people; they have more stereotypes and prejudice about outgroup members than low-power people (e.g., Goodwin et al., 2000; Guinote et al., 2010; Richeson  Ambady, 2003). Stereotypes are about what people think about other groups (e.g., Blacks are athletic) while prejudice is about what people feel about other groups (e.g., Whites have negative attitudes toward Blacks).  
Goal: 
My goal is to investigate why high-power people show more bias (stereotypes and prejudice) than low-power people by focusing on motivational and attentional processes. Are high-power people less motivated to be unbiased than low-power people? Do high- and low-power people differ in how they pay attention to out- and ingroup members (e.g., (Blacks and Whites) and if yes, does this explain why high-power people are more biased?  
Method: 
To study these questions I will conduct a series of studies in which I will manipulate participants' power (power primings) and then measure their stereotypes and prejudice using implicit association tasks. Implicit stereotype and prejudice tasks allow to measure unconscious biases on the basis of reaction times in associating groups (e.g., Blacks and Whites) with certain stereotypes (e.g., Blacks are athletic) and valences (positive vs. negative evaluation). I will measure participants' motivational processes by using questionnaires. Attentional processes are typically outside conscious awareness. Instead of asking participants by questionnaire, I will therefore study the attentional processes by looking at how the brain reacts. To do so, I will register high- and low-power people's brain activity during the stereotype and prejudice task using electroencephalography (EEG).  
Significance: 
High-power people judgments and behaviors have, by definition, a strong impact on others. By clarifying why high-power people stereotype more and why they have more prejudice about outgroup members we will get information that can be used to develop appropriate training techniques that would efficiently reduce the biases of high power people. 