 Lead Lay summary Describing functioning of mycorrhizal symbiosis and functional diversity of mycorrhizal 
communities is actually a challenge in microbial ecology. In mycorrhizal symbiosis, the 
fungal symbionts benefit plants in a number of ways although the most important is 
enhancing soil nutrient mobilization and uptake. Mycorrhizal fungi efficiently mobilize and 
take up water and nutrients (i.e. phosphate) from the soil via the extraradical mycelium and translocate them to the plant partner via the tree-fungal interface, receiving carbohydrates in return. The functioning of extraradical mycelium and mycelium from the tree-fungal interface presumably relies on the existence of a complex regulation of fungal gene expression with regard to nutrient sensing and resource partitioning between host roots and symbionts. A model plant as Populus (poplar), which can form mycorrhiza with both arbuscular (AM) and ectomycorrhizal (EM) fungi is of interest to address this purpose. New emerging methodologies open perspectives in the functional study of mycorrhizal poplar. Nextgeneration sequencing (454 pyrosequencing) may help to fill the gap in our knowledge on the composition and the structure of mycorrhizal communities associated with poplar under various scenarios of environmental change. Genomic sequences and "gene chips" of Populus trichocarpa  and associated mycorrhizal fungi as Glomus intraradices  (AM) or Laccaria bicolor  (EM) are powerful tools to study the mycorrhizal symbiosis and to select genes that may be important for its function. Actually, no results are published in this respect. Transcriptomic targeted analyses by qRT-PCR using sequenced genome ( P. trichocarpa , L. bicolor , G. intraradices ) give informative patterns of gene regulation. Nevertheless, none of these studies have assessed at the same time the transcriptional response of the plant and the fungal symbiont in the mycorrhiza and in the extraradical mycelium. In particular, the extraradical mycelia that develops outside the roots in mycorrhiza is considered as the most functionally diverse component of this symbiosis; it provides extensive pathways for nutrient fluxes through the soil and should adapt to constant changes of soil chemical properties (nutrient patchiness). Different approaches can be combined to study functioning of mycorrhizal symbiosis in controlled condition to establish a functioning model before extrapolation to forest ecosystem functioning and redundancy/complementarity of functions. 
To summarize, it appears that the study of both symbiotic partners using poplar as model tree in AM and EM symbiosis along the soil-extraradical mycelium-fungal/tree interface-tree continuum is a promising research axis. Moreover, the use of new technologies and developing of integrative projects will aim at increase knowledge about taxonomic and functional diversity of mycorrhizal communities in nutrients and water uptake. 
The project I propose here is developed in this respect and has two main objectives: 
1. Determine the structure of mycorrhizal communities associated with poplar. A well 
equipped poplar field site will be sampled; both diversity in soil (containing extra-radical 
mycelium of mycorrhizal fungi and mycelium of other fungi as saprobes) and roots will be 
assessed by 454 pyrosequencing of the ITS region as target to evaluate the colonization and the spreading of mycorrhizal species as well as the place of mycorrhizal fungi in soil fungal diversity. Such diversity will be related to soil chemical parameters and plant physiological parameters to get information about the influence of both soil and plant on resilience of mycorrhizal fungi. 
2. Elucidate phosphorus transfer in mycorrhized poplar under drought stress by integrative 
approach. The aims of this project are to study phosphorus transfer in mycorrhizal poplar (EM and AM) under water stress conditions. This project will be the first analysing the plant and the fungal response to changes in soil phosphorus concentration and water deficiency in mycorrhizal plants. The molecular data (transcriptome and proteome) will be analysed in the light of accurate physiological data describing the phosphate uptake and transfer from the soil to the plant under water deficiency. The co-analysis of the transgenic polar and its non-transgenic sister-line (not able to regulate the transpiration by stomatae caused by a mutation of an ABA receptor) will help us to discriminate and select genes, which are involved in drought adaptation from those which respond passively to the constraints. 
The present research proposal is at crossroads of taxonomic and functional diversity in 
mycorrhizal symbiosis. It aims to provide answers to fundamental basic processes and 
on their cross-talk. Moreover, the originality of this work is its integrative aspect by 
using different emerging methodologies to measure different functional traits on both 
partners.