 Lead Lay summary It is now widely agreed that embryophyte land plants have a sister-group relationship with green algal groups characterized by life cycles in which the haploid gametophyte dominates and diploids are represented only by unicellular zygotes. Therefore, the evolution of land plants is tightly linked to the evolution of diverse life cycles and ultimately to the origin of the alternation of generations. The presence of two generations with clearly different functions and morphology, the same genetic background, and shared as well as differentially expressed gene domains have important consequences for phenotypic and genotypic evolution that ultimately govern the evolution of alternation of generations both at the micro- and macroevolutionary scale. Therefore, molecular mechanisms underlying structural and functional differences between the gametophytes and sporophytes of derived land plants are critical for understanding how the alternation of multicellular generations evolved at the macro- and microevolutionary scales.

Hence, the proposed research will focus on correlated and differential expression of whole plant phenotypes in isogenic gametophytes and sporophytes, combined with transcriptomic and genomic analyses of gene expression and evolution. Mosses provide an ideal model system for our study because they are extant representatives of the earliest diverging lineages of land plants with macroscopic photosynthetic gametophytes and sporophyte generations that can be propagated and measured easily. Plasticity in both whole plant fitness components and transcriptome profile will be quantified by growing plants in multiple experimental environments. Next generation sequencing technology will be used to partition transcripts into those biased in abundance toward sporophytes, toward gametophytes, and unbiased.

By measuring whole-plant phenotypes, transcriptomes, and underlying genomic variation in two mosses this project will address a series of hypotheses focused on (1) genetic correlations between and environmental plasticity of whole-plant fitness components in the sporophyte and gametophyte generations, (2) transcriptome differences between sporophytes and gametophytes and plasticity in gene expression, and (3) substitution patterns in genes expressed in sporophytes versus gametophytes.
This research will help to resolve major issues in evolutionary biology such  the forces governing the evolution of alternation of generations in embryophyte land plants, the long-standing question of phenotype-genotype relationship as well as the effect of ploidy on gene expression and molecular evolution at a genomic scale, a central question of life cycle evolution.