 Lead Lay summary Depression is one of the foremost disabling and socioeconomically relevant illnesses, with 10-20 % of the population at risk during their lifetime. A promising strategy to develop more efficacious treatments is to define depression according to specific biological markers, endophenotypes, which relate to a specific genetic characteristic. Endophenotypes can be translated from humans to mice using new genetic technology and can allow the identification of novel targets for drug development and therapy. Subjects with depression show an increased sensitivity towards emotionally negative events, for example when they receive a negative feedback. In the brain, negative events and emotions are modulated by the neurotransmitter serotonin (5HT), and 5HT levels in the brain are modulated by the 5HT transporter (5HTT). In humans two genetic variants of the 5HTT gene have been reported. One of these variants, the short (s) allele variant of the serotonin transporter linked polymorphic region (5HTTLPR), has been associated with an increased risk for developing depression, particularly when carriers of the s-allele have been exposed to stressful life events. The goals of the study are, first to understand how genetic variation of the 5HTT may increase sensitivity to negative feedback and risks for developing depression, and second, to translate this into an animal model that can be used to study the mechanism and to develop new treatments. First, we propose to compare how human carriers and non-carriers of the s-allele with and without depression process negative feedback using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). The results of the study will help us understanding how genetic differences influence brain activity when we process negative feedback and how these differences are related to depression. Second, we propose to conduct a translational study in mice to understand if exposure to a stressful environment increases sensitivity to negative feedback in mice with low 5HTT. We will compare the sensitivity to negative feedback in mice with only one copy of 5HTT gene instead of the usual two, and wildtype mice that have been exposed to a stressful environment or kept in a standard housing environment, and we will look at the effect of antidepressant. Finally, we will look at how these genetic and environmental factors influence brain activity using MRI. Because major depression is a global health problem with significant economical impacts on society, a better understanding of the effects of low 5HTT function on negative events can lead to improved pharmacological and behavioral therapy treatments that focus on treating this major state marker of depression.