 Lead Lay summary Multiple mating by females generates competition between males (and ejaculates) and conflict with the female over sperm use and paternity, and is one of the main evolutionary forces responsible for the diversity in reproductive characters. The interactions between ejaculate and female reproductive tract characters are thought to contribute to the evolution of reproductive incompatibility between divergent populations and species. Conceptual progress on these interactions, however, has been hampered by a general lack of knowledge concerning sperm behavior and the mechanisms of differential male fertilization success both within and between species. 
This project will examine the mechanisms underlying fundamental aspects of the fertilization biology in Drosophila melanogaster and related species. Transgenic strains of Drosophila that produce sperm with heads that express a green or red fluorescent protein, respectively, enable us for the first time to unambiguously discriminate among sperm from different males within twice-mated females, as well as to directly observe real-time interactions between sperm from different males within the female reproductive tract. 
In three main experiments I will investigate in vivo sperm performance and morphological compatibility within female genital tracts that differ in their morphology. The first experiment will examine the relationships of sperm morphology and function with the morphology of the female reproductive tract, using male and female D. melanogaster that differ in the length of sperm and female sperm-storage organs, respectively. The second experiment will compare sperm behavior and the mechanisms underlying sperm competition between different Drosophila species. The third experiment will determine the mechanisms of ejaculate-female incompatibility in hybrid matings between sibling species that are closely related to D. melanogaster. In all experiments, I will quantify the number and location of the respective sperm from two males of different populations or sibling species, respectively, throughout the female reproductive tract across a time series. I will also quantify and compare sperm behavior in vivo between mixed and unmixed ejaculates. 
The results of this study will, for the first time, provide information on the mechanisms underlying sperm competition in vivo to advance our understanding of the morphological variation in reproductive traits and its consequences within populations, and the evolutionary diversification of these traits between species. 