 Lead Lay summary Were where you when you heard about the terrorist attack on the world trade center? Can you remember receiving your high school diploma, your first kiss? Very likely you are able to remember these emotional events. Emotions have a profound impact on what we learn and keep in mind. Why is this the case? What are the mechanisms that lead to better memory for emotional compared to neutral events? And how may these emotional memories change over time?  The aim of my research is to characterize and understand the behavioral and neurobiological mechanisms that underlie the effects of emotion on various stages of memory, i.e. memory encoding, memory storage, memory retrieval and additional storage processes after retrieval. To address the question how emotion influences these memory stages, I take a synergistic approach trying to integrate the neurobiological level with the cognitive level using a combination of various methods. I am using functional imaging, for example, in order to scrutinize the brain mechanisms during periods of rest following an emotional event that may be linked to better memory storage for emotional events. Or, in previous studies, I was able to show that decreasing or increasing stress hormone levels with a specific medication leads to an impairment in memory retrieval that was most profound for emotional events. In the present Ambizione projects I will examine the brain mechanisms that are linked to the action of various stress hormone levels on memory retrieval. I am also interested in how memories for emotional events may change over time and I am planning to develop behavioral paradigms that test the notion of memory reconsolidation for emotional events, i.e. test whether emotional memories can be changed over time.  Better knowledge of the psychological and neurobiological underpinnings of emotion and memory interactions will help to understand essential features of memory mechanisms that are relevant to teaching and education methods, and may also provide new insights into the nature of some major psychological disorders, particularly anxiety disorders and post traumatic stress disorder.