 Lead Lay summary Accreting black hole systems comprise two main classes: stellar-mass black holes in binary systems (black hole binaries, BHB) and supermassive black holes in active galactic nuclei (AGN). 
Although the mass scale between the two classes roughly spans eight orders of magnitude in black hole mass, both classes are found to share a number of common properties. As the gravitational radius of a black hole is proportional to the black hole mass, the mass-to-radius ratio is independent of the mass. The resulting mathematical simplicity already suggests that black hole systems might be scale-invariant over the whole mass range. In addition, a number of common features are observed in both classes of accreting systems, including similarities in the X-ray variability properties and radio jet emission, providing further support to the hypothesis that the accretion process is the same in all accreting systems. 
These considerations are at the basis of the so-called AGN-BHB unification scenario, and understanding the relationship between accretion in galactic and supermassive black holes is currently considered one of the major questions in the field of high energy astrophysics. 
In this research project, I would like to study the AGN-BHB connection from the point of view of the underlying accretion flows, by comparing common phenomena observed in both classes of accreting systems. 
Similarities in the X-ray variability properties of BHB and AGN have been known for a long time. In particular, both supermassive and stellar-mass black holes are found to follow the same X-ray variability scaling, relating the observed variability timescale to the black hole fundamental parameters. We have previously derived a characteristic X-ray timescale within the framework of a clumpy accretion model in AGN that well reproduces the empirical scaling relationship. I now plan to analyse whether the clumpy accretion scenario can be extended to the case of stellar black holes, or if the variability scaling arises from more fundamental properties of the underlying physical processes. 
Another common feature observed in both classes of accreting systems is the presence of relativistic radio jets. While there is a quite clear correlation between radio jet emission and accretion state in black hole binaries, the connection is much more subtle in the case of AGN. By analogy with the BHB case, I would like to study whether the possible distinction between radio-loud and radio-quiet AGN can somehow be related to the accretion process and be explained in terms of differences in their respective accretion modes. 