 Lead Novel oxide semiconductor thin films are investigated and their heterojunctions are processed for photo-voltaic applications. Selected oxide semiconductors, such as i-ZnO, ZnO:Al, SnO2:Sb, Cu2O, CuO, SnO and MoO3-x were deposited by magnetron sputtering, sol-gel and spray pyrolysis techniques. First p-CuO/n-ZnO oxide heterojunctions in both substrate and superstrate configurations for semi-transparent solar cells were fabricated, and a weak photovoltaic effect was obtained. Lay summary Idea
The innovative idea is to implement the oxide heterojunctions into semi-transparent solar cells, which generate photo-current by absorbing near-UV part of the solar spectrum while transmitting longer wavelengths. The term "semi-transparent" is used in this contest to account absorption of violet-blue light because the bandgap of absorbing semiconductor oxide can be selected as narrow as 2.5 eV (500 nm).
Project work
The project involves the systematic investigation of thin film deposition and properties of novel oxide semiconductors, and processing of their heterojunctions. The focus is primarily on oxide semiconductors because many of them possess wide bandgaps in the required range of 2.5-3.8 eV, are robust materials, resistive against oxidation and moisture corrosion, and are suitable for large-scale thin film deposition; although other compounds, such as chalcogenides or nitrides, should not be excluded. The work will be performed at the Laboratory for Thin Films and Photovoltaics at Empa, Dübendorf.
Significance
Obviously, the proposed structures alone cannot be considered for high-efficiency solar conversion because their absorber band gap is far from the optimum 1.5 eV required for the maximum photoconversion. However, the unique property of SSC to transmit visible light makes them especially suitable for several applications, such as moisture- and oxidation-resistant upper sub-cells in multijunction solar cells, or "multifunctional" windows for integration in high-rise buildings.