 Lead Lay summary Somatoform disorders are bodily disorders that still cannot be readily explained by biomedical means. Among the cluster of somatoform disorders, somatoform pain (SPD) is a common and important symptom that causes substantial individual suffering and disability in daily living as well as high direct and indirect costs for health care systems. The contemporary climate is marked by the prominent political, legal, economic, and regulatory ramifications of SPD. Because of the high socio-political importance of SPD, the proposed project will investigate a range of factors potentially involved in the development and maintenance of this condition.     Evidence from the limited number of studies investigating the factors that are likely to cause SPD highlight the crucial involvement of not only environmental factors (such as interpersonal factors), but also genetic factors in disease development and maintenance. Genetic epidemiologic studies have shown strong evidence for a genetic contribution to SPD and have further highlighted the important role of gene-environment interaction for the disorder. Furthermore it has been suggested that interpersonal factors ? couple interaction in particular - might have an important impact on the mechanism that may underlie transition from acute pain to chronic SPD.     The proposed project consists of two sub-studies and will complement knowledge on the aetiology of SPD. A multifactorial and longitudinal experimental design will be implemented and data will be analysed using multilevel analysis strategies to investigate the influence of couple interaction on the transition from acute to chronic SPD. Second, exploration of DNA epigenetic patterns that regulate gene expression profiles will provide the missing link between epigenomic state (i.e. gene expression), SPD and the effect of relationship quality/partner behavior. In the context of a multi-site collaboration involving King`s College London (KCL), existing epidemiological, genetic and molecular techniques will be applied and integrated to investigate the molecular consequences of gene-environment interactions in SPD.     Overall knowledge gained from this integrative research project has the potential to increase the quality of daily life for the increasing amount of individuals suffering from SPD, to prevent social and behavioural changes arising from SPD - such as increased drug abuse and increased prevalence of mental ill health -, and to underpin economic prosperity my reducing health care service related costs. Consequently, the proposed project is timely and highly relevant as it has an important socio-political impact.  