 Lead Lay summary The defining feature of eukaryotic cells is the nucleus, a membrane enclosed compartment where the genetic information is stored as genomic DNA. The expression of protein coding genes involves coordinated and interconnected processes starting with transcription of the genomic DNA into pre-messenger RNA (pre-mRNA). The primary transcripts are then processed and the mature mRNA is exported from the nucleus into the cytoplasm where the information is translated into proteins.  
Trypanosoma brucei, a single-celled parasite causing sleeping sickness in sub-saharan Africa, branched away from the main lineage very early in the evolution of eukaryotes. Hence, trypanosomes show tremendous differences in gene expression compared to commonly studied model organisms ranging from yeast to human. In the parasites, protein coding genes are not transcribed individually into mRNAs. Instead, long precursors containing the genetic information for several different proteins are transcribed. As a consequence, trypanosomes cannot regulate the expression levels of individual proteins by transcribing different amount of mRNAs. Rather, differences in mRNA levels are made post-transcriptionally, mainly through differential stability of individual transcripts.  
We hypothesize that regulation of the export rate of individual transcripts from the nucleus to the cytoplasm is an additional mechanism of post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression in T. brucei. This has not been investigated yet in any detail. Thus, this study is intended to identify and functionally characterize key factors involved in nuclear mRNA export in T. brucei. Nuclear export is well understood in higher eukaryotes and a common set of conserved export factors is defined. However, due to the high divergence of trypanosomes, only 2 putative export factors could be identified by bioinformatics after searching for orthologs in the trypanosome genome databases. Hence, we will use biochemical approaches to isolate and identify additional export factors of trypanosomes.  
The primary aim of this work is to define protein complexes that function in nuclear mRNA export in T. brucei. Since these proteins act in an essential and indispensable step of eukaryotic gene expression, they might be exploited as promising drug targets to fight the parasites. In addition, this study will contribute knowledge from a very distantly related organism to a biological mechanism that is intensively investigated in higher eukaryotes. This will not only provide more insights into nuclear mRNA export, but also allow a more global view onto the evolution of post-transcriptional mechanisms of gene regulation.