 Lead Lay summary Rainfall variability poses a challenge to agricultural production and ecosystems in sub-Saharan Africa. Its projected increase in African drylands will likely worsen the precarious climatic conditions for crop production, thereby making food production conditions more volatile, increasing food insecurity and loss in ecosystem services. Resilience as a concept offers a way to measure how agricultural livelihoods and ?landscapes successfully function or can function despite these climatic disturbances.  I use r esilience to refer to the capacity of individuals, social groups or social?ecological systems to persist, adapt and function despite disturbances or changing conditions such as climate change. Resilience can be applied to livelihoods and landscapes. An agricultural landscape consists of several farm plots and other areas with no or different farming management. Since resilience cannot be directly measured, I will develop proxies and indicators for it. To capture resilient landscapes, indicators such as land cover or biomass can be used. This project hypothesises that resilient agricultural livelihoods correlate with resilient agricultural landscapes and identifies the factors for such positive relations. As existing resilience frameworks have limitations for research using a livelihood perspective, I will first re-configure resilience for livelihood-oriented research of social-ecological systems. I aim to analyse: (1) how agricultural livelihoods and -landscapes successfully function under droughts and floods; (2) whether and how such livelihoods and -landscapes correlate, and the roles of socio-economic factors, institutions and policies; (3) the implications of regional climate change projections and rainfall trends for building resilient livelihoods and landscapes; and (4) policy options for supporting and up-scaling such livelihoods and landscapes.  I will use past project sites on sustainable land management in Kenya, Tanzania and Nigeria to select cases for in-depth study. My methodology combines qualitative, quantitative and spatial data, derived from interviews, discussions, field measurements, digital maps and satellite images. I will use content analysis, statistical analysis and develop resilience indices.  The project contributes to the advancement of Human Geography and Development Studies by providing insights into the interactions between resilient agricultural livelihoods and -landscapes under conditions of increased rainfall variability. By reconceptualising and operationalizing resilience, it provides new analytical tools. It contributes to efforts to identify and upscale practices that sustain food production in sub-Saharan Africa.