 Lead Lay summary This project will look at the evolution and ecology of horizontally transferred genes in bacteria. Not only can genes pass between parents and offspring (vertical transmission) but in a number of organisms, they can also be transferred horizontally. In bacteria, such horizontal gene transfer can come about through three processes: transfer through bacterial viruses (known as transduction), the uptake of DNA from the environment (known as transformation) and transfer through cell-to-cell contact, such as transfer of genes on plasmids (known as conjugation). In many pathogenic bacteria, it appears that genes involved in virulence and anti-biotic resistance are carried on plasmids, and hence can be transferred horizontally. This raises the question as to why this is so, and why doesn't the cell keep these genes if they are beneficial. Additionally, plasmids (which are circular extra-chromosomal pieces of DNA) often incur costs on their hosts. This project will address how plasmids may persist, why they carry the traits they do, and why, if costly, evolution hasn't selected for host to eliminate plasmids.  
This project will primarily be theoretical and involve building very general models to investigate the conditions under which genes, that can be either beneficial or detrimental to a host, evolve to be carried on plasmids. These models will then be extended to address specific questions, such as why do plasmids carry cooperative traits, which benefit their neighbours (by secreting virulence factors or antibiotic resistance). As secreted proteins can be exploited neighbouring cells, they can be seen as public goods. Plasmids may hold the key to promoting such cooperative traits as their transmission increases local genetic relatedness, thus conferring an inclusive fitness benefit to producing secreted proteins.  
This project will also address the issue of which level selection works at, whether sat the gene, individual or lineage, and will model how mobile DNA such as transposable elements, which selfishly copy themselves with a genome, can bring about extinction of bacterial lineages: as mobile DNA can be transmitted horizontally, they behave like parasites, and may drive host extinction if they become too common in a lineage. Relating to ecology, models will be developed to investigate how ecological factors such as demographic and environmental stochasticity influence whether or not a gene evolves to be transmitted horizontally.  
All of these questions are eventually to be tested by using available bacterial sequence data. This will be done in collaboration with bioinformaticists, both in Switzerland and abroad. This project addresses a wide range of issues in evolution and ecology, from asking which level selection acts, to how cooperation can be maintained in organsisms such as bacteria. In addition, it will have implications to the study of epidemiology and infectious diseases as many pathogenic bacteria transfer key genes, involved in antibiotic resistance and virulence, horizontally, and thus may help in understand how superbugs, which are resistant to many antibiotics, may evolve.