 Lead Lay summary The sympathetic nervous system (SNS) and the renin angiotensin aldosterone system (RAAS) have both direct and indirect affect on the renal circulation, the secretion of vasoactive hormones or peptides and the renal handling of sodium. The SNS, the RAAS and impaired renal excretion have been implicated as possible cause in the development of hypertension in conditions such as obesity and isolated office hypertension, which have both been associated with the absence of nocturnal fall in blood pressure (non-dipping pattern). Therefore our hypothesis is that these clinical conditions may share a common physiopathological mechanism, which could be explored in humans using an orthostatic stress test (lower body negative pressure: LBNP). 
Aims: The main objective of our experiments is to demonstrate that conditions associated with increased renal sympathetic nerves activity such as obesity, isolated office and non-dipping are characterized by an impaired natriuretic response to an orthostatic stress induced by LBNP. Population studied: 6 groups of patients and subjects will be studied. A control group (normotensive), an obese patients group (hypertensive and non-hypertensive), a group with resistant hypertension, and finally an isolated office hypertension patients group. 
Experimental plan: Each patient will be enrolled in a randomised double blind placebo controlled crossover designed protocol. Each subject will be studied during 2 periods (after seven days of a placebo or of an angiotensin II receptor blocker). Day and night urine collection and ambulatory blood pressure measurements will be realized during the 24 hours preceding the study day. Renal hemodynamics, neuro-hormonal and natriuretic response will be studied before, during and after a one hour -30 mbar LBNP period during the study day. The patients with resistant hypertension will be investigated before and after renal denervation. Significance: The whole project will focuses on increased renal sympathetic nerve activity as one of the contributing factors to the defect in renal sodium excretory capacity so fundamental to a prevailing concept of the development of hypertension. It should increase the knowledge of the pathophysiological role of the SNS, the RAAS, the renal sodium handling and their interaction in pre-hypertensive state such as obesity and isolated office hypertension. 