 Lead Lay summary Reliable, selective and environmentally friendly chemical transformations are crucial to the development of new therapeutics and the design of novel materials. Chiral catalysts that can be easily prepared and used to obtain organic molecules of high enantiomeric purity are critical to modern chemical synthesis. 
The scope of this project can thus be divided into three main fields, each of them aiming to find solutions to current challenges in synthetic chemistry:
a) development of enantioselective syntheses of the N- and P-stereogenic molecules as Tröger's base type scaffolds 
b) preparation of novel organocatalysts analogous to Tröger's base
c) application of these novel organocatalysts in new synthetic transformation with emphasis on dual catalysis

The design of the novel catalysts will be inspired by the unique structure of Tröger's base in which the inversion of the bridgehead N-atoms is hindered. From the outset the prominent efforts will be made towards development of stereoselective methods for the construction of these molecules based on enantioselective hydrophosphination and ring-closing transformations via dynamic kinetic resolution. The post-modification of the Tröger's base scaffolds via C-H activation, a field of modern chemistry which is currently developing at a rapid pace and which meets the atom economy criteria of green chemistry perfectly, will be extensively studied. Considering the importance of nitrogen in chemistry and biochemistry, the development of efficient synthetic methods for the construction of stable N-chiral molecules seems to be of immense importance with a potential far-reaching impact.

The methodologies will be applied to the synthesis of a novel class of organocatalysts including Bronsted bases, N-heterocyclic carbenes, phase transfer catalysts and phosphines.

The enticing concept combining organocatalysis with transition metal catalysis remains a largely unexplored area. The use of cheap organocatalysts as a single source of stereogenic information together with metal devoid of expensive chiral ligands renders this approach highly attractive for the industrial application. The efforts of this project will thus be primarily directed towards the development of new synthetic approaches in dual catalysis with potential applications in the synthesis of biologically active compounds or industrially interesting molecules. Furthermore, taking into the consideration the character of the catalysts synthesized, they will be naturally also tested in purely organocatalytic reactions  and as ligands in coordination complexes with transition-metals.