 Lead Lay summary Learning and memory are the crucial processes by which our past experiences influence our present decisions. Those processes - which ultimately characterize who we are - are widely thought to be implemented at the level of the individual connections between neurons: the synapses. Despite their fundamental role, the dynamics of synapses remain poorly understood. Indeed, far from being static transmission relays transferring information from one neuron to the next, synapses are highly modifiable (plastic) elements and those changes act on a wide range of different time scales (nine orders of magnitude, i.e from milliseconds to weeks). For example, short-term plasticity  (which is induced by presynaptic activity) lasts for tens to hundreds of milliseconds  while long-term plasticity (which requires both pre- and the postsynaptic activity) lasts for hours to days.  
In addition to the complexity induced by this wide range of time scales, the biophysical processes underlying synaptic dynamics are mediated by a large number of biochemical elements whose interactions are not yet well understood. So is there any hope to understand synaptic plasticity? Here we approach the question from a reverse-engineering perspective. This approach is well illustrated by the quote from Horace Barlow: "A wing would be a most mystifying structure if one did not know that birds flew". In the context of synaptic plasticity, this means that we will start by postulating potential functional roles to which synapses obey, then derive the plasticity rules and finally compare the results to biological data.  
The grant proposal is divided into 2 parts. In the first project, the goal is to elaborate a unifying theoretical framework which embraces both short-term and long-term plasticity aspects. This study will extend our previous modeling work on short-term plasticity. In our earlier work on short-term plasticity, we showed that the biologically observed short-term plasticity dynamics can be matched to the dynamics of an optimal estimator of the presynaptic membrane potential based on the past observed spikes. We will extend this framework by assuming that the model parameters describing the presynaptic membrane potential dynamics are not known a priori by the synapse but have to be learned (at a slower time scale). Another generalization of this model will be to assume that the synapse estimates a potentially non-linear function of the presynaptic membrane potential where this non-linear function is parametrized by the long-term weight that can evolve on a slower time scale. Both extensions will provide testable predictions on how short-term and long-term plasticity should interact from a normative perspective.  
The second project aims at developing a normative model for temporal sequence learning in spiking recurrent networks. Several brain systems need to be able to store and recall precise sequence of spikes. For example, the juvenile songbirds learn a song from their fathers and reproduce it for the rest of their lives. As a consequence, juvenile songbirds must learn a stereotypical spiking pattern that will eventually produce the father?s song. Here we will address this problem from a general perspective. Instead of learning a specific spiking temporal sequence, the recurrent network will learn a distribution of sequences. We will derive analytically the corresponding learning rule and compare it to biologically plausible learning rule.