 Lead Lay summary Metals have played an important role in the past millenniums of human history. Periods like the bronze and iron age has been named after the metals used at the time.  Contemporary man's sword craft has evolved into a science of characterizing and understanding material properties. Harnessing semiconductors like silicon has enabled the creation of computers and revolutionized our daily life. The impact and importance of material research can therefore hardly be underestimated. In the past couple of decades, more than a handful of Nobel prizes have therefore been awarded to the discovery or understanding of metal physics such as superconductivity (1987, 2003), colossal magnetoresistance (2007), quantum hall effect (1998), and most recently the discovery of graphene (2010). Ever since 1956, Landau theory of Fermi liquids and its notion of quasiparticles have been founding our understanding of how electron interactions  affect the properties of a metal. However, in the past decades an increasing number of so-called strongly correlated electron systems that defy a description with the Fermi liquid concept of quasiparticles have been found. These non-Fermi liquid metals are unconventional in the sense that they do not form Fermi liquid quasiparticle and hence not Fermi surface is present. The observation of unconventional superconductivity and colossal magnetoresistance emerging from non-Fermi liquids have only enhanced the desire to understand strongly correlated electron systems that hold enormous technological potential for power transmission, data storage, or medical imaging.      This project is concerned with strongly correlated metals at and near the limit where the concept of conventional Fermi liquids is breaking down. A central goal of this project is to provide an experimental road map of how Fermi liquids are breaking down and being replaced by a non-Fermi liquid. A second and related objective is concerned with the unusual normal state of high-temperature cuprate superconductors. This research proposal is therefore divided into two sub-projects that will be executed in parallel.   