 Lead Lay summary The central objects of this project are the algebraic structures called groups. A group is a set together with a nice (associative, and allowing inverses of elements) operation such as addition or multiplication. Solving equations with integer or rational number coefficients has been an important intellectual endeavour for thousands of years. Here we propose to study equations in groups, where the process is more abstract and difficult. Unlike addition or multiplication, the operation in a group can be non-commutative, and the elements in a group could have a behaviour that the integers don't.  The most interesting groups to study, because of their connections to geometry, logic and computer science, are free groups. There are structures that resemble the integers together with addition, but the operation is not commutative, that is, a*b is not equal to b*a. Many mathematicians have worked in this area, trying to find algorithms that solve equations in free groups. In particular, Makanin and Razborov in the 1980's have provided such algorithms and therefore shown that solving equations in free groups is possible. However, their algorithms are both extremely complicated, and not helpful in practice because they are too difficult to implement on a computer.  This project is meant to bring a better understanding of the algorithmic, combinatorial and asymptotic aspects of the solvability of equations, which is the researcher's area of expertise.  Concretely, one of our goals is to understand how likely it is, for a random equation in a free group, to have solutions. Another goal is to understand the most important class of equations, called quadratic, in groups where not much progress has been made with respect to these equations. Related to the study of equations there are many natural decision problems, such as the endomorphism, monomorphism, (doubly) twisted conjugacy, Post Correspondence Problem and others. We would like to completely characterize the solvability of these problems in groups that are more complex than free groups, but not very different in nature: free products of groups, surface and possibly hyperbolic groups.  The progress we make should be of interest to mathematicians in the areas of algebra, geometry and logic, and to theoretical computer scientists.         