 Lead Lay summary Our research focuses on a central yet unresolved issue of surface water groundwater interaction: heterogeneity of the streambed and its impact on the dynamics of flow and the transport of solutes. To increase our understanding in this field, we build on latest methods to generate highly realistic streambeds, and simulate the dynamics of flow and transport, using one of the most advanced numerical models currently available.  
Background: The state of our environment is critically dependent on our most valuable resource, water. The current state of science in the field of hydrology, and the interaction between surface water and groundwater in particular, strongly suggests that our understanding, our tools and methods are insufficient for the sustainable development of our water resources. The major unresolved challenge is the influence of streambed and aquifer heterogeneity on various scales. Geologic heterogeneity can manifest itself, for example, in groundwater flow speeds that vary by several orders of magnitude within a very short spatial distance. Understanding how heterogeneity controls the physics of the water and solute exchanges is urgently required to advance sustainable water management.  
Methods and Goals: To make a significant advance in this field, we are using the latest developments in multiple-point statistics to generate highly realistic streambed and aquifer heterogeneity and investigate their impact using HydroGeoSphere, one of the most advanced numerical models. The combination of these tools with high-performance computing technology will allow for the first time a systematic analysis of the impact of realistic heterogeneity on stream aquifer exchanges. We use synthetic models to study how geologic and temporal complexity affects the surface water groundwater interaction and will analyse to what degree complex geology and the conceptual model can be simplified. We will also model well documented, real world examples to test the general applicability of results obtained with our synthetic models. The project sites are located in Australia (The Murray River), Switzerland (the Rhône) and in China (the Tarim River in Western China).  
Impact: An increased understanding of the influence of heterogeneity on surface water groundwater interaction will provide modellers with better tools to make sound decisions on conceptual complexity. Besides the technical advances in numerical modelling, our research will allow the advance of the physical understanding of catchment hydrology, which will result in a direct impact on the development and application of management strategies.