 Lead Lay summary The clotting protease activated protein C (APC) is the first and still only drug approved to treat patients suffering from severe sepsis. Although APC reduces mortality in very sick patients with sepsis, it has substantial side effects such as lethal bleeding complications. Major research efforts have clarified the underlying mechanisms for the desired and the side effects of APC. Desired effects of APC depend on a functional Gla domain allowing the protease to bind to the endothelial protein C (co-) receptor (EPCR) resulting in cleavage of the co-localized protease activated receptor (PAR)-1 and by this mediating cytoprotective effects through PAR1. In contrast, binding to negatively charged membrane domains mediates the degradation of the procoagulant activated clotting factors Va and VIIIa resulting in an anticoagulatory side effect causing bleeding complications. Anticoagulation by APC limits the dose which can be given without risking too many and too severe bleeding complications in patients. Therefore APC can only be used to a limited extent in humans, i.e. in a selected patient population and way below the optimal dose which would be necessary to achieve the best cytoprotective results. In order to get around this problem, mutations of APC have been engineered. These compounds are only up to 7 times less anticoagulant and have similar cytoprotective effects. Thus the problem of inefficient cytoprotective effects and remaining bleeding risks persists. By combining published data, our own expertise and observations from our clinical work, we propose to address this question by a fundamentally novel approach. We propose that modifying APC?s Gla domain so that it specifically binds EPCR with high affinity will result in more efficient protective signaling of PAR1 and remove the anticoagulant side effects.  The goal of this project is to engineer a novel variant of APC with specific cytoprotective proprieties. As a novel approach, we propose to replace the Gla-domain by an antibody fragment that binds EPCR with high affinity. We plan to test the resultant chimeric APC composed of an antibody fragment, a spacer and the protease domain for (1) residual anticoagulant effects, (2) its ability to cleave and activate PAR1 and most importantly (3) for mediating cytoprotective effects in biologically relevant assays such as enhancing the endothelial barrier function or preventing staurosporine induced apoptosis. We plan to engineer chimeric APC for two species, human and mouse.  This proposed engineered chimeric APC is expected to be highly cytoprotective and not to have any anticoagulant effects. It has the potential of being used in the future for treating patients with inflammation driven conditions such as sepsis or stroke.