 Lead Lay summary Cold baryons (stars and gas) in  Milky-Way size halos account for only
~ 20 % of their   associated  baryons.  The  search for   these
missing baryons remains as an unfulfilled quest in cosmology.
Observations  of local X-ray absorbers, high-velocity neutral clouds,
and distant quasar absorption line systems,
suggest    that a significant fraction  of
these baryons may reside in multi-phase, extended, ~ 100  kpc,  gaseous halos of normal
galaxies.
We propose a  series  of focused cosmological simulations  to model
the gaseous halos of individual galaxies at very high resolution,
with the goal of  confronting a range of
halo-gas  observations.  We specifically aim to understand  how gas-halo
observations constrain the nature of gas infall into galaxies (e.g. cold vs. hot,
streams vs. clumps)  and
how heating mechanisms can affect the acquisition of gas,
the formation of hot halos, and the rate with which halo gas cools, fragments,
and fuels galaxy formation.  We will employ a version of the smoothed particle hydrodynamics code
GASOLINE that allows us to to track infalling and cooling gas
at extremely high resolution.  The proposed work includes
(1) a suite of  high-resolution, hydrodynamical
simulations  of a single  galaxy halo set  within  a full cosmological
context; (2) a series of exploratory simulations  of isolated
galaxy halos;  and (3) constraining different models of galaxy formation using optical, \HI, X-ray and absorption line observations.
The isolated simulations will be used to develop methodology
and explore trends in halo properties as a  function of  dark matter
halo mass.  The  cosmological  simulations will   be used to  explore
the detailed topology of cold flows; to provide
realistic initial conditions for hot halo fragmentation; and to explore
the impact of
pre-heating mechanisms on the acquisition of gas on
subsequent cooling of gas from pre-heated
galactic halos.  One of the  goals of this  proposal is
to  simultaneously compare  a variety of
multi-wavelength  probes  of galactic  gas  within  a  single coherent
picture of galaxy assembly and to use this as a baseline for future
evaluation of models.