MAN. Munich starting the MAN Nutzfahrzeuge AG in Munich plans an automated cab silo in Munich. The planning of the new, automated buffer camp not reliable enough with conventional, static methods possible. The static performance requirements on the new storage concept are known. The resulting dynamic accelerations and velocities for shuttles and lift requirements should be determined in a simulation model. The influence of different input and swap strategies should be checked with regard to the capacities of the system. The methods used so far for planning take into account the dynamics of the input, output and storage to only partially. To perform a simulation study to increase planning certainty and to protect the investment in the new automatic storage. Objectives using simulation to the requirements to be defined funding and the material flow control concept developed. The effects of different input and retrieval strategies will be shown up. The capacities of the system should be determined taking into account various factors. In particular, the provision of functional and performance test stated objective is. The correctness of dimensioning and control of subsystems, as well as of the overall system is already before award of the contract to ensure as far as possible. Refers to a correct sizing here, that only the really necessary under custom conditions resources are used. Control concepts are to develop and validate, bottlenecks must be determined. Nutzfahrzeuge AG defined quantity to man in the Simulator processed and evaluated the system in terms of the required services. The following goals and specifications are achieving as a function of the quantity structure in detail: - velocities and accelerations of the shuttle - velocities and accelerations of floor conveyors - speeds of all other funding - time to a range of 1 position to determine and verify the control strategy for the camps out of the driver's cabs and move - times for the arrival and uncoupling -. The simulation model should serve in the phase of award of the contract, to assess the various system provider with respect to the required services. Cost savings - best selection of system providers - reduction of time for commissioning. -Control - efficient planning - optimized scheduling changes with regard to effects on the dynamic interactions to assess understanding of system - justification and validation of the selected solution. -Prevention or elimination of bottlenecks. -Simulation model as training object. -Process optimization by any objective functions. -Plant operators and consultants can access through EXCEL interface even without knowledge of the simulation on the model and check the system for the parameter sensitivity. Increase in safety - functionality of the planned system. -Minimizing planning-related sources of error. -Quality of requirements specification flexibility – short-term provision of decision making. -Determine optimal structures. -Design time-optimised processes. The workload data, parameters and variables passed to the Simulator via Excel
