Conservation of the canton of Zurich In the conservation concept for the canton of Zurich (NSGK) by 1995 construction of ten to twenty new experience of nature and learning areas is intended Department. To date, three large and two small such areas were established. A cantonal concept should now define the tasks and the development of other nature centers and coordinate. Three major nature centres in operation are currently in the canton of Zurich: Wildlife Park Zürich, Sihlwald, Neeracherried nature reserve, nature station willow on the Greifensee. The opening of a fourth centre on the river Thur in Flaach is planned for 2011. The centers are privately operated. You have a service agreement and are supported with some well-known contributions of public. You perform tasks in the education, public relations, regional coordination and the reserve service. In the general population enjoy nature centres of a growing popularity. They are actively visited and the offer does not cover today the demand yet. With a parent concept, which advantage on behalf of the Department conservation of the canton of Zurich is developed by the Department of education of the IUNR, the PHZH and the private office, synergies can be with regard to the further expansion of nature learning places use, conserve resources, and coordinate the tasks and educational services of the centres. One such concept is the first of its kind in the Switzerland. It becomes therefore a nationally important and pioneer role him. The following objectives are to be achieved with the concept of nature centres in the canton of Zurich: – based on the NSGK shows the need for nature centers and with know - scientific findings justified. -It is evaluated, and to assess the demand for additional proposals will be how big. -It is presented is assumed by which understanding of education and how sustainable development should be integrated in the educational work of the centres. -Objectives and target groups, which are to be achieved with the offers will be defi ned. -It necessary and timely educational approaches are shown, which take into account the requirements of lifelong learning and education for sustainable development (GNI). -It shows how big will be the cost of building and operating the centers about how large the centers should be and how they can be distributed over the canton. -Financing possibilities and the forms of organization of the nature centres be dar set. -The centres responsibilities today part of reserve service. Possibilities are pointed increasingly to undertake this task and at the same time to connect with education. -Outbound activities from nature centers can also interfere with nature. Major impacts as well as fitness and risk of protected areas should be collected according to the latest findings and evaluated. Keywords: environmental education, education for sustainable development of GNI, lifelong learning, educational concept, framework educational, instructional design
