Office of public health background: due to the demographic development, a shortage in health care is predicted for the Switzerland. Already, there is a difference between personnel supply and demand. At the same time, every year over 3000 people who sign up for medical school, will be rejected due to the restrictions on admission (Numerus clausus). Target: The Federal Office of health wanted to find out with a study, whether people which must be rejected for the medical school, could be obtained for other courses in the field of health. There was the assumption that at least some of the rejected candidates is interested in other training in health care. As well, it has been suggested that rejected people currently lost healthcare as potential workers. It should be checked whether these persons have sufficient knowledge about alternatives, such as the offer of Bachelor in occupational therapy, nutrition, dietetics, midwifery, physiotherapy and nursing at the college level, or whether there is a need for information on the candidates. In addition, should be clarified what trainings are alternatively completed or planned and whether the universities have spare capacity available, such candidates to take up. Method: It two surveys have been carried out: A survey of applicants/Interior - vintage 2011 and semi-structured telephone interviews with Bachelorstudiengangsleitenden in the field of health at the Swiss universities of applied sciences. Results: Total persons have involved in 1448 the survey. Only a small part of the rejected applicants (8% of all rejected persons) has recorded an alternative education in the field of health or such planned. Currently the majority of the rejected candidates as future workers lost, as has been suggested by the BAG actually healthcare. It shows that alternative training in health when the candidates are not sufficiently well known and that for rejected information would have been helpful. The universities of applied sciences survey showed that for the occupational therapy, midwifery, nutrition and dietetics, physiotherapy courses throughout Switzerland admission restrictions. For places, the demand exceeds the offer partly to a multiple. Only the degree of care and medical radiology technology have spare capacity. To meet the demand for professionals in the health sector in the future, it needs more places at tertiary level in the field of health.
