FHNW, University of Zurich, University of Fribourg, University of Basel, University of Geneva the foreign or home placement of a people is a significant moment in his life. What precedes this decision and what does it mean for the remainder of the affected persons life? This question is at the heart of the SNF research project home placements in the canton of Zurich: influences of regulatory decisions between 1950 and 1990 on the rest of your life. Researchers of various Swiss universities and universities starting position within the interdisciplinary Sinergia research project third-party placement of children in Switzerland (1940-1990) deal with the system of home education in the second half of the 20th century. The whole project is divided into three subprojects, which one performs at the ZHAW social work. Goal of the subproject of the ZHAW investigated what influences had regulatory decisions and interventions on the later life of third-placed persons. It connects the logic of regulatory interventions with the resulting consequences in later life of the then third-placed children and young people. Focus is – unlike as in the overall project - the years between 1950 and 1990 questions are the central issues of the project: • which roads led to the third-party placement? • What influences had regulatory decisions? • How developed professional methodologies and standards in administrative practice between 1950 and 1990? • There was an increase of awareness with regard to the central position of life histories in the case work? • What individual life histories, took place after the foreign placement? Methodology examines the subproject intentional and unintentional effects of administrative intervention and foreign placement on the after institutional biographies of affected persons. This historical and biographical analysis are connected: • A perspective analyzes the administrative decisions and justifications of the guardianship authorities on the basis of documented cases. • Perspective B examined the influences of foreign placements on the further life histories of former home children.
