Cities of the future. Cities of nearby. What factors determine the quality of life in the future by medium-sized towns? Living in a medium-sized city of the future look like? How can the quality of life of the residents for the future be preserved and promoted? The Winterthur Urban Forum dares to peek into the future of city life. The Winterthur Urban Forum is a contribution of the ZHAW on the anniversary of the city of Winterthur. Issues such as growth and urban development are currently on everyone's lips: citizens - and neighbourhood associations, politicians, urban planners, architects, sociologists, economists intensively deal with the development of cities. Trends such as urbanization of society, demographic change, technological inventions, new media, and generally the social dynamics of growth will change life in the cities. What challenges await the medium-sized cities of the future and the major development trends offer what are the chances? How do cities with these challenges to and what concepts for their development exist? Even Winterthur can be seen as a prototype of a mid-size city, which is subject to a forced change. Discuss Forum at the Winterthur urban experts and the interested people about the challenges and opportunities for the future of cities. It will go to past experience, future development concepts and urban utopias. The focus less is the technology or architecture, but the quality of life in the city everyday. Living and working forms change. New and other life and forms of communication are evolving. It will deal with future forms of participation in development processes, to self design possibilities in the city life, to new urban life, labour and forms of communication. How will we live in 20 or 30 years? How are our cities look like? Cooperation partners of the Conference are: City of Winterthur Winterthur, Zurich University of applied sciences date: Thursday, November 27, 2014-Saturday, November 29, 2014 venue: Theater Winterthur, Zurich new library ZHAW School of management and law, Congress and Municipal House love Street
