Chur, Swiss Institute for information science initial situation and problem position for the project each year develop HTW in the Switzerland around 6,000 patients on prostate cancer, the most common type of cancer in men. Various treatment options available are patients, an organ-limited ("localized") prostate cancer was diagnosed, each with its own advantages and disadvantages. How can the patient know what is the best choice in his specific case? How are benefits and risks of different therapy approaches? The answers to these difficult questions vary according to the individual situation of the persons concerned. With tailor-made information, decision making facilitate an interdisciplinary working group of researchers of the Zurich University of applied Wissenschaftten (ZHAW) and the Hochschule für Technik und Wirtschaft, Chur (HTW) want to mitigate this problem. Under the direction of Peter Rüesch (ZHAW) and URS Dahinden (HTW), they develop an online platform that will meet the information needs of patients and to support communication between doctor and patient. The tool is then tested in the urological clinics of stakeholders and evaluated the results of the field test. Several focus groups consisting of accompany methodical approach from patients and physicians with the development of the platform. Thanks to this participatory process the different needs of those affected can in the project from the outset and be taken into account. The tool is developed step by step, the Group discussed, modified and adapted. In the subsequent field test, by means of written questionnaires collected feedback of participating patients and carried out an evaluation of the use of the test with the participating urologists. The final product of the development and the evaluation process is a functional, proven in practice online platform for information therapy for localized prostate cancer. Knowledge transfer knowledge transfer by begin's gone an integral part of this project. Patients and specialists are the two main target groups in this online platform and involved from the beginning in the development work on this platform. This has several advantages: on the one hand a fully informed patient can better decide how he wants to deal with his illness, and therefore also better accept the therapy. On the other hand also the cooperation between the patient and sedation physician will be with the online platform supported, E.g., unclear issues electronically to mark or hold open questions on an electronic Notepad. The platform is to improve not only the information of prostate cancer sufferers, but deliver even broader insights for the elaboration and use other online tools in the Oncology - or health.
