Cooperation project of the Zurich University of applied sciences and University of applied sciences Eastern Switzerland in the framework of the federal programme remains stubbornly equal opportunities between women and men in Fachhochschulen BBT segregation by gender at the professional orientation. In vocational training, many branches are dominated either by women or men. Also at the universities, the differences are considerable: men still rather go in the technology and the economy, women choose the arts and Humanities, the social and the design more. These preferences are related to the historical professional cultures in the study. The professional cultures and the didactic Act at universities of applied sciences to meet the learning needs of both sexes. Genderkompetente teachers adequately introduce the gender issue in the classroom and provide results from the gender specific. As a result, the professional and career opportunities expand for students. Last but not least reflected by women and men in Fachhochschulen of equality required for the quality development and accreditation. This cooperation project aims, criteria for gender justice and gender-based Curriculagestaltung, to develop teaching and content in the fields of economy, social work, art and education and in the completed BBTProjekt "Gendergerechte technical sciences" to complement 1 produced results. It should be stimulated a discussion on the inclusion of gender sensitive aspects in teaching and training with their specific characteristics. To proceed: round 20 Studiengangsleitende and lecturers from the four departments are the recommendations for the didactics, the Curriculagestaltung and the appearance against outside in an action research using interviews, workshops and diary logs themselves develop and bring within the own trade culture a critical reflection process. This creates a wide range of statement options to the gender aspects of professional cultures and teaching at the universities of applied sciences. The results will be published in a scientific publication. On the website of the Department of gender studies at ZHAW materials for gender teaching and Curriculagestaltung will be provided after completion of the project. The project lasts from September 2009 until the end of August 2010 and is financed by the Federal Office for professional education and technology OPET. 1 the detailed final report on the project can be viewed at www.genderstudies.zhaw.ch, services / downloads.
