Summary background patient with rheumatic diseases are often AIDS angewie-sen, which allow a gentle movement to protect of the joints and allow them existing constraints to perform everyday actions. Such daily living AIDS are smaller devices to the personal care, cooking, food, mean for the budget or support for Office work. In the Switzerland, the supply of AIDS is based so far try after referred to as empirical values of the occupational therapists and occupational therapists. The process oriented comments are mostly not on scientific evidence and theoretically justified models. There is an assessment for the specific Swiss context, which conforms to the map the scientific methods and distribution of tools supports therapists. Objective of the requirement for occupational therapists and occupational therapists in the German Switzerland for the distribution of AIDS patients and patients rheumatic disease to me after an assessment levied. Occupational therapists and occupational therapists who carry out aid supplies to must to be interviewed, what specific requirements they have after such an assessment, what specific requirements set on a sol Che and what conditions are taken into account in the development of an appropriate instrument for clients with rheumatic diseases. Methodology there were approximately 374 people, which association under the area of "Rheumatism" are listed in the database of occupational therapists or ever in the past means of support when the rheumatism League had ordered, were contacted and the gebean survey-th, to take part. 169 occupational therapists and occupational therapists took part in the online survey. This comprised 42 questions and required 15 minutes to fill out. The echo on the occupational therapists written to and occupational therapists was very positive results, the response rate with 48% very satisfactory. The majority of respondents stated that there is a need for such an assessment from their point of view. This should take into account the specific Swiss context, on the basis of a checklist or an interview off led or part of a model of resource supply process. Also, the assessment should give an overview of the relevant tools. The assessment also in other areas of occupational therapy should be applied whenever possible, in particular - especially in orthopedics/surgery and Neurology. The majority of respondents per-sonen are willing to take a certain training expenses in buying, this should not exceed one day. In addition, the instrument in the purchase of should be cheap.
