Swiss National Fund (SNF) research object/situation due to the internationalisation of companies and of the migration movements in the Switzerland persons of from different backgrounds work in Swiss companies now on all levels of the hierarchy and increasing mother tongue together and the number of multilingual work teams. The understanding in the team is carried out in English or German, which often represents a foreign or second language in the majority of the participants. So far too little account in the research of the linguistic challenge, these teams need to make and the strategies which they use to efficiently manage their communicative tasks. Although numerous studies on the relationship between cultural diversity and group performance exist in the organizational psychology and small group research, however is this interculturality reduced on value systems and ethnicity and the factor language implicitly or not taken into account and his influence is therefore also not systematically investigated. Vice versa communication of multilingual working groups investigates while in Linguistics, but not from the perspective of communication efficiency and optimize the collaboration within the team. Thus, linguistic aspects of team communication constitute a blind spot in psychological research. Linguistic efficiency in working groups is also little addressed in organizational communication. This research gap should be closed with the proposed project. The settlement of the project at the interface between linguistic communication and team performance in the organization requires an approach combined from language and social science methods, based on action-theoretical approaches of linguistic pragmatics and the organizational psychology. It is issues and key objectives of the interdisciplinary research project to analyze how communicative efficiency in multilingual, language-various internal working groups concluded. Our hypothesis is that communicative efficiency depends on how the team with its diversity of languages is capable, i.e. like corporate cooperation in teams/groups situations-and act constellation specific to different linguistic and communicative tasks in the company. Methods to answer the research question are team meetings examined conversation analytic and carried out an analysis of the document. Validated survey instruments are used in the field of organizational psychology. Also, interviews with stakeholders and authorities are conducted and evaluated. Profit for practice and research findings from the study used the practice partners as the basis for the targeted promotion of multilingual teams and to create a best-practice model, which is harnessed for other teams in the company. Technically the project constitutes a contribution to closing the gap in the studies of the effects of intercultural team compositions, between those researched Teamdiversität and linguistically described multilingualism.
