Europe should be noted for several decades: children cannot grow up with their parents, increasingly live in foster families than in the home. However, studies suggest that the care conditions are not always stable, and it comes to demolitions. The study (English title: foster care placement breakdown) examines the factors and causes for the crash. The obtained findings should help to stabilize the Kindspflegschaften. Position how high the number of crashes by care conditions in the Switzerland, is largely unknown. The same applies to the causes and the solutions. The demolition of a care relationship is however not a static moment, but a lengthy process. This includes the situations of the child prior to placement, the placement of the child, the dynamics of crisis events and the consequences of the crash. Aim the aim of the study is to evaluate the reasons why Kindspflegschaften in the Switzerland will be canceled. What factors play a role and how to make the processes that may lead to an unexpected termination? With the acquired knowledge, the Kindspflegschaften should be stabilized in the future. Recommendations for the Swiss practice be formulated in cooperation with INTEGRA and the foster child action Switzerland and selected cantonal authorities. International cooperation allows exchange of knowledge with research partners from England and Germany also beyond the borders of Switzerland also. Methodology the project going in three steps, which will be implemented in three years. First, quantitative and qualitative data are collected in the Switzerland. This parses files and interviews carried out. International research partners will be included in a second step, investigate unexpected crashes of Kindspflegschaften in England and Germany, present examples of best practice and assist the project team in the Switzerland. A multi perspective reconstruction in an analytical model of interdependence is carried out also. In the last step of the project, from the results of the investigations of the practice recommendations and these - implemented together with our practice partners - in the Switzerland.
