Low woman shares in Technical University of applied sciences courses in the Switzerland and the increasing demand and competition for trained technicians and sparkler innovative training require today by universities of applied sciences, to get good and motivated students. How can that be more attractive technical sciences for both sexes? This question was conducting for this development and implementation project in the three technical courses in electrical engineering (ET), Business Informatics (UI) and biotechnology (BT) at the Zurich University of applied sciences (ZHAW), which was carried out between January 2007 and may 2008 and financed by the Federal Office for professional education and technology (OPET). Because traditional role models still strongly influence the choice of a field of studies of men and women, this project had content aimed to work out reforms be curriculum and teaching forms of technical courses. Because young men as potential students, not more satisfied with a traditional technology concept and want to take their engineering studies with a variety of life designs and pathways in line. The project focused on the outbound and enclosing features of a specialized cultural environment affecting the imbalance of the sexes therefore, in addition to the visions and the didactic and substantive concepts of the courses. In the project gender-sensitive criteria of lessons and best practices were refurbished in a first phase examples from existing research, to create a most adequate and situation-related description of gender differences, as well as by different professional cultures. It next, in the analytical and implementation-oriented part, members of the respective programmes are drawn to. Focus was the sighting of relevant study-specific documents (organization chart, curricula, module descriptions, etc.) while, on the one hand, to highlight the performance of the respective programme against outside under sensible criteria, on the other hand interviews and workshops were conducted to uncover the living compartment culture on the respective courses and reflect on gender awareness and. In two workshops and a two-month diary tour of twelve lecturers of the selected courses in which they tested content and learning methods of the own teaching on gender-related aspects and formed the core of. Own stance in the interaction with the students they could watch as critical and in interdisciplinary discussions about the own trade culture expressing. The involvement of various actors/inside this project has contributed significantly to the acceptance of the subject matter and increased willingness to apply the acquired gender competence of participating (in the future) in the classroom.
