Introduction background of the mandate of the CTI is the establishment of the training of health professions at university level in the Switzerland. The order giving notice that an inter - or transdisciplinary composition of a research team in the field of health is an important prerequisite. The planned study should provide foundations for the future direction of the CTI promotion of applied research in the field of health. Questions the questions of the study concern the following themes: success factors, term research, scientific reputation, research funding, requests for research, quality criteria, acquisition of practice partners, science-practice partnerships, research transfer. Methodology for the planned trial stretched across three phases: exploration − analysis of − reporting. Were selected as the methodological approaches: literature review and qualitative interviews. It was carried out problem-centred interviews with ten qualified persons. Three exemplary projects of applied health research were to do this, and selected with a transdisciplinary focus. two projects came from the German Switzerland, one from the French-speaking Switzerland. Of these three Projektenwurden each end of project lead,-mitarbeitende and the practice partners interviewed. Also interviews with two Forschungsleitenden of universities of applied sciences in the field of health were asked which one each from the German and the French-speaking Switzerland came. The interviews were evaluated with the qualitative content analysis techniques. Research needs of of practice in the field of health is big and varied results.However, the requirement for a high commitment and the investment of substantial (financial, human, and temporal) resources cannot afford all potential business partners.The majority of the partners are public institutions; little represented the private sector ist(noch). The existing financial support of applied and trans-disciplinary research vessels are considered to be insufficient. You are criticized as to one side aligned with standards of University Research (Foundation SNF) or evaluated (KTI) but too much determined by market-based criteria. The procedure of Gesuchsstellungder KTI is very positive, that the SNF as negatively judged. The third-party funding of University research is generally considered conducive for their practical relevance. Nevertheless, a partial equity financing of research as necessary is considered as a foundation for scientific innovation and creativity. The effort for the coordination and management transdiszplinärer research projects is as highly valued and often underestimated. For a successful science-practice partnership emphasizes the following factors: (1) development and maintenance of trusting and respectful relationships between all stakeholders; (2) a continuous and open communication and information in the course of the project; (3) clarification and coordination of the objectives and issues between researchers and practitioners. (4) flexibility of researchers in planning and project management. A transfer of research results in the field of health will take place normally. The real challenge the sustainability and the impact of the transfer of results, which are often not guaranteed. The ' product 039; many research projects in the health sector generated while a benefit at the practice field, but it is often not commercial purposes and is not even perceived as such.The exploitation of research results is often confined to the practice partner and finds no distribution among other potential buyers. The financing of publication activity seems problematic, since she usually not through the project budget can be covered, but is not clearly regulated apparently even within the universities of applied sciences.
