Project completed. Situation: In the clinic of Valens, currently two care diagnostic procedures be applied to raise the level of care of patients. Is the advanced Barthel index (EBI), which measures in the areas of activities of daily living (ATL's) ability errors (Saed et.) Al, 2006) and the results-oriented anamnesis acute care (ePA_AC ©, on-hand of the self care ability of (self care index - SPI) levied on patients-th in the acute hospital (hunt stone et.al 2005).) Since both instruments collect same information to the ATL's, an application of both instruments is neither useful nor efficient. From nursing perspective favours the ePA AC as Assessmentinstrument, as the instrument of a) more information generated, b) automatically identifies risk factors such as falls, pressure ulcers and pneumonia, and c) with the LEP catalog (performance capture care) is linked to which selected measures may be charged directly. In addition, that more and more hospitals in the Switzerland apply this instrument, what beneficiaries the ability to compare data and the further development of the instrument. The use of the EBI is due to the tradition / history of the institution, research results, as well as the membership of the clinics of Valens in the National Association for quality development in hospitals and clinics. The EBI in conjunction with ICF is the standard meter of this organization and must be applied by all members. It was examined whether the two instruments are similar to and from the ePA_AC © generate survey can be the total score of EBI. Question: In how far match totals EBI, the overall score of the ePA AC simultaneous use in the same individual? Method: to answer the question, we used a quantitative retrospective Design.Mittels regression analyses were compared and tested as models the constructs of the two instruments. It can be said that the constructs of the EBI can be depicted with the ePA_AC and the total score can be generated. Thus, a double survey could be avoided in the future.
