: 01.01.2005-further information / further information: Swiss virtual campus S-3-076: advancement of reading and writing skills of engineering students at UAS. Subproject theoretical Gundlagen. -The blended-learning project aims to encourage young adults to develop their reading and writing skills. The planned sessions focus on reading and writing in the context of studies and profession. The course includes classroom teaching, tutorials and practical work in different disciplines. It is aimed at students of the Technical University of applied sciences courses in the South as well as in the German Switzerland. Interactive, multimedia E-learning units to motivate the students to deal with various forms of text (summary, log, report, etc.). The students should be convinced that the own work not only for personal success in learning is crucial, but also for the future employment. Also the teachers are made aware of the learning aspects of the read and write process in the respective fields because they actively participate in the course modules. In this way they can change their writing habits with the goal of more effective teaching and learning. The multimedia presentations of the scheduled course representing once access especially for young readers and writers are facing new motivations to win. In other words: to improve the reading and writing skills are not only targeted reading - and writing important, but also the favorable influence of the recruitment of students to read and write. The usage of computer-assisted environments to promote the reading and writing skills is useful for the following reasons: it stimulates literal activity of students; It provides access to those text productions, which are strongly required in training and in everyday working life; It facilitates collaborative reading and writing forms important learning in groups; He supports the generation of content in a variety of forms of representation and thus the differentiation of expression; It facilitates the advising of the processes of text understanding and writing teachers. Swiss virtual campus S-3-076: advancement of reading and writing skills of engineering students at UAS.
