Westfalia Separator Food TEC GmbH was taken on the 15.09.2003 in the Württemberg wine Zentralgenossenschaft/Möglingen Inc. (instruments) for the extraction of grapes in operating a new continuous process. The WZG had carried out extensive tests since 1999 with the Westfalia Separator Food TEC GmbH and the specialty beverage of the Hochschule Wädenswil, to make the system uninstall decanter based on the maturity of the application. This established the first fully continuous extraction system for red grapes on the basis of the Thermovinifikation. A phase separation of mash fermented material and white mash is also possible. The total investment amount including building and peripheral to EUR 3.4 million. Three independent processing lines with a capacity of 20-25 t / h can be operated with different temperature / time programs. In a tubular heat exchanger is the preheating of the Destemmed red mash against most heated. The preheated mash enters the heating line (Alfa Laval GmbH), is heated to 82-86 ° C and by means of horizontal screw centrifuge (decanter) Juiced after a holding time, which may be subject to charge 2, 4 or 6 minutes. Several hours increased contact time for the extraction of the skins, as well as the response time of the pectin-depleting enzymes to improve the press, does not apply in this procedure. The hot juice flows to the phase separation for heat recovery in the exchanger and then via a two-stage most cooling under enzyme - and Schönungsmitteldosage in an intermediate tank. After 3 h the most about a centrifuge in the fermentation tank can be stored. An altered turbidity management developed in cooperation with the Erbslöh beverage technology, Geisenheim is necessary due to the relatively high colloidal turbidity of the musts of 1200-1600 NTU. To do this, a Pektinasepräparat at a concentration of 1-3 is ml / hl most used. Largely to avoid the formation of false notes, the Cinnamoylesteraseaktivität was greatly reduced. The enzyme preparation has a Rhamnogalacturonaseaktivität that influence the success of fining. Continue to proteases are included in the preparation, which can positively affect providing exploitable yeast N-compounds. The enzyme preparation obtained by surface fermentation using Aspergillus niger with subsequent treatment. For the fermentation of red grape at 20-24 ° C, a colloidal turbidity NTU of 400-600 is recommended. Clearer is the must in the fermentation, higher is the content of prozesspezifischen fermentation aromas such as ISO-amyl acetate. The colloidal cloudier goes the wine in fermentation, the higher is the primary Sortenaromatik. Limiting factors in this context with turbidity values are 800 NTU, as a result of high cell proliferation of yeasts, oxygen deficits, which can carry 50 NTU nutrient deficiencies, the incomplete and problematic fermentations and Böcksern values. When white grapes, cloudiness is set by 150-300 NTU. The separation of pomace and fluid not is this procedure due to pressure difference like in the press, but by centrifugal force due to the inertia. The mash flows through a central inlet pipe into the rotating de decanter drum (fig. 1). Due to the high centrifugal force held an immediate separation of juice and pulp. The separated pulp is supported by a rotating with differential speed worm from the de decanter drum. The juice flows to the opposite end of the drum and will be further promoted under pressure. The advantages of the tested technology are: - homogeneous juice quality - fast and gentle processing - low gross Lees share (0.5% (m/m) spin trub) - closed and therefore hygienic juicing.
