The cultural and creative economy in the Switzerland has grown steadily in the past few years attention and importance. As part of the knowledge-based economy, whose complexity and importance steadily increasing, it turns out to more and more as creative catalyst and more important drivers of innovation. The third creative economy report in Zurich (October, 2010) that are in the year 2008 over 200'000 persons engaged in well 40'000 companies of the Swiss culture and creative industries. This corresponds to 10% of all farms and 5% of all employees in the Switzerland. The number of employees has increased by 8% between 2005 and 2008, the number of farms by 4% (gross value: CHF 20'5 billion;) Sales: CHF 87'9 billion; Share of GDP: 4.2%). The creative economy is considered economic to purchase part of the culture economy. Real are huge culture and the creative industries but the linkages between the production system. Many projects in the field of culture and creative industries receive subsidies by both private and public sources or be carried out together. Services in the field of culture are often purchased by public institutions or bodies to private companies or individuals. Personal relationships and networks beyond the limits of public/private and allow as first cultural activities. Scenes, clusters and networks are central principles for the development of cultural and creative industries. In addition to encourage competitiveness through employment growth, innovation and stronger entrepreneurship, cultural and creative economic activities make a not inconsiderable contribution to the attractiveness, location and quality of life of a region. So, the Zurich City Council has declared the promotion of cultural and creative industries to the legislature focus for the period 2010-2014. The cultural message of the Federal Council for 2012-2015 acknowledges their great relevance for economic, social and cultural. The following sub-markets are among the cultural and creative industries: music (musician /, Orchestra, band, recording studio, agency, organizer, Festival, concert hall, etc.), book (Bookstore, Publisher, writer /-etc), art (galleries, art education, artist /-, organizer, Museum etc.), film (Director /-, actor /-, organizer, Festival etc.), broadcasting (TV, radio), performing arts (theatre, dance, makeup artist /-, actor /-, Beleuchter-/, organizer, Festival, institution etc.), design (fashion design, industrial design, Visual communication, etc.), architecture (also interior design), photography (art, press photography, etc.), press (journalist /-in, newspaper and magazine publishers, etc.), advertising (advertising agencies, PR agencies), arts &amp;amp; crafts, software/games development, Phonotechnischer market (production and trade in TV/radio and other devices) Winterthur has in the last two decades a successful residential policy maintained. It is since 1990 to around 103 (2012) a considerable increase in the population of 16% ' 000. Employment, however, has stagnated (1991: 57'600 employees, 2008: 56'000 employees (source: BZ2008).) The industry lost half of your employees in the same period. Health and welfare won above-average employment shares. Overall, an in-depth analysis and intensive occupation with the potential of cultural and creative industries in Winterthur and region is displayed against the background of these economic structures, as well as of the cultural profile of Winterthur. The Centre for cultural management of the ZHAW is currently conducting a potential study on the collection, analysis, and development of clusters of cultural and creative industries in Winterthur and region, with the aim of scenarios/measures for the further development of the cultural and creative economy markets to derive and develop. The study will provide for the first time all relevant information about the location of Winterthur as well as the areas of culture and creative industries. The results will be in more perspective ways especially in regard of the Winterthur art culture, education mediation, social and economic issues such as innovation support and force, creative cluster and site development be interesting, useful and beneficial. Project objectives: • determination of the spatial, employment and offer relevant potential to the development of clusters of cultural and creative industries in Winterthur and region with regard to the development of adequate strategies and measures. • Capture the potential of the city and region of Winterthur as well as deriving from scenarios/activities, allowing it to consolidate the relational wealth of the region and to develop.
