The ZHAW has a «college strategy 2009». This strategy has the normative foundations of the ZHAW in terms of legal bases, establishes the normative ethical values, as well as the Mission of the ZHAW and formulated six characteristics (internationality, interdisciplinarity, selectivity, social anchoring, personality education and economy), with which the ZHAW wants to establish. In January 2013, the University decided to perpetuate the «strategy 2009» with marginal adjustments in the meantime. The six characteristics of profiling offered until now a major guideline and are wide at the ZHAW and firmly anchored. Rename the main pillar in the future based on where the ZHAW. The University has also decided the retreat by June 2013 on the main topics of the multi-annual planning 2015-2018 to agree and to adopt them until the end of 2013. Now the six characteristics of profiling the ZHAW indicate no direction in their relative generality and partial generality however to the ZHAW is to move in the next ten years. The strategy 2009 is a typical «Polytechnic founder strategy», which neither specific nor differentiated is enough in the future educational and bureaucratic context but to maintain the ZHAW in a successful future and distinctive position in this respect. The profiling features are limited as a management and control tool. At the same time with the provisional confirmation of the basic features is to initiate a process, therefore, with which the University has developed a long-term, equally specific as flexible «strategy 2025» 2015 in the first quarter. Also a look at the strategies of other universities of Switzerland suggests that the further planning of the strategic development of the ZHAW is essential. The strategies of universities demonstrate in their style and their nomenclature, that they have already adapted the successful features of the universities of applied sciences (at least on the discursive level). The only recourse to a specific type of College and whose characteristics no longer sufficient therefore for a strategic positioning of a University of applied sciences. And: while other universities define the regional technical colleges as a strategically important partner (E.g. the University of Basel), is a reference to the ZHAW lacking in the strategy of the University of Zurich. The strategy development process of the ZHAW needs therefore also an institutionalized regional and (inter -) national relationship practice. The aim of the project is the strategy 2025, which creates a common orientation for the ZHAW. This strategy must serve as a management and control tool for the ZHAW and at the same time enable self-determined completion of action spaces through the individual sub-systems and their individual members, who can make productive each specific knowledge for the partially autonomous use of open spaces in this way. 2.2 qualitative benefits an organization lives from their future design and refers to their strength from this. Every organization needs an idea about their future identity and their future positioning in the environment to obtain their vitality. Long-term strategic planning is more important than to suspect, that will deteriorate the loading conditions for the universities of applied sciences under the HFKG and the competition among the higher education institutions will intensify. It is to assume that funding for education and research go back in the coming decades especially in light of demographic developments and the associated financial requirements in particular in the sectors of security, health and Social Affairs. It is moreover likely worldwide may significantly change of higher education in their structure and meaning. So some experts and experts in higher education assume that many colleges disappear, and that in particular the open courses and the opportunity to enrol at several universities (network universities) will massively change the College landscape. There are hardly any empirical studies on models and effects strategic academic planning. The presumption appears justified, however, that for strategy development an understanding of management Central is, which relies on observation, communication, flexibility and reflection of the changes inside and outside of the University, which can deal with ambivalence and contradictions, without thereby seeing the urgent need for a strategic focus of the overall organization.
