City the city of Wädenswil Wädenswil has developed together with experts of the Zurich University of applied sciences (ZHAW) in Wädenswil an app for smartphones. This depends on the local population, as well as to people who are in Wädenswil to guest. The second group involves mainly students, apprentices and teachers of many local educational and research institutes. ZHAW specialists from the Institute for applied simulation and of the regional development research group have participated in the app. Thanks to their knowledge, the app contains some new features. So can you now with electronic support "Tony discover". The app offers a range of exciting local "small destinations" from the fields of architecture, recreation, history, art and nature. Photos, a short text and a map provide interesting information about the respective place. Is this linked to a competition: who visited the site on his next walk, can be credited to a collector. Ten destinations or ten points on the account who receives a small reward in the Stadtbibliothek (beautiful mountain road). "Discover Tony" goes back on the landscape development concept (LEK) 2012. In the city among other things takes, to bring the beautiful but often unknown corners of the city population. This allows the new function of app users choose exactly these corners after own interests, to inform, and actively explore now. The app has further "Augmented Reality", a playful orientation function. Through the display shows the desired destination with a symbol. Also issues be included with the app, that are relevant to the education and research city. So, all educational and research institutions presented and published their "news". The section "Student housing" provides a platform where landlords and students can better meet. The app also includes a calendar of events, gives an overview of the activities, shopping places and restaurants. The app for iPhone and Android was at the start of the ZHAW academic year 2013/2014-launched and is a service provided for the whole population. She is also a further step towards the legis-laturziel, to make education and research city Wädenswil visible and noticeable.
