Berner Fachhochschule Gesundheit Objective: The major goal of incontinence treatment is to reduce symptom burden and ensure that patients’ resources are as helpful as possible. This goal requires standardized assessment that will represent the typical spectrum of functioning problems, and positive or negative influencing factors of patients with urinary (UI) or fecal incontinence (FI). There is need for a validated short, simple instrument to quantify urinary (UI) and fecal incontinence (FI) impact to aid health status assessment and communication between patients and health professionals. Current level-A recommended questionnaires provide valid assessment of UI and FI, but do not cover all aspects of the burden of the disease in the sense of the bio-psycho-social model of the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF), which limits the quality of the assessments. To address this problem, two Universities of Applied Sciences in Switzerland (ZHAW and BFH), are working together to develop an evidence-based, reliable and valid ICF-based Incontinence Assessment Form (ICF-IAF). This aims to: 1. identify problems and resources, 2. assess the impact of UI and FI on health status and 3. develope a standardized assessment for planing and evaluation of interventions. Methods: The ICF-IAF will be developed using the following sub-projects: 1a. Systematic analysis of level-A disease-specific questionnaires (done). 1b. 3-round Delphi technique survey with experienced German speaking physiotherapists from Austria, Germany, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg and Switzerland (ongoing). 2a. Patients’ reports using focus groups (2015-2016), 2b. Personal patient interviews to ask about problems, resources and aspects of the environment relevant to their disease. Responses to be translated (‘’linked’’) into ICF language using standardised rules (2015-2016). Consensus-Conference: After training in ICF-IAF, and based on preliminary studies, relevant ICF categories will be identified, and a formal consensus agreed by German-speaking experts with physiotherapy backgrounds (November 2016). 3. International and multiprofessional validation using the Delphi process incorporating all relevant health professionals (2017-2018). Expected results: The ICF-IAF will be a short, simple questionnaire for assessing and monitoring UI and FI. The current translations of the ICF can be used world-wide and will help to standardize therapy and research protocols. KEYWORDS: Urinary incontinence, fecal incontinence, bio-psycho-social model, ICF, questionnaire, problems, resources.
