: 14.10.2005 partners / project partner (s): IE industrial engineering study of three automated material flow concepts for a new building for storage and picking food. The three material flow concepts: - multi-level picking on conveyors and sorters - 1-step picking via Monorail - connection of automatic high-bay warehouse, or day camp to picking the effects of the different scenarios on the material flow and the necessary human resources cannot be determined statically. The simulation study to show the dependencies, the advantages and disadvantages of the different material flow systems and variants. The simulation has the following objectives:-understanding of system dynamics in terms of number and workload staff in the individual picking areas depending on the batch sizes, the number of end points of the sorter and the capacity of the sorter. -The determination of an optimal control strategy for the interplay of different picking areas and buffer - derived findings about the influence of the batch size to the required number off sluices points, as well as the utilization of staff in terms of picking and the determination of an optimal control strategy and batch size. -Knowledge about the influence of article sites in the camp on the performance of the system and the utilization of employees. -Sizing and control of subsystems, as well as of the overall system. -Assessment of various building layouts on system dynamics, performance of the system, employees use and staff utilization. -Determine the limits of the system, pinpoint bottlenecks and elaboration of measures to fix this – showing how the system under maximum load acts - determine the utilization of individual system components, determine the effect of different scaffolding of amounts of - determine, influence the individual system parameters on overall performance - determine, implications errors on the system performance have - insights into the economics of. Variants in comparison - assessment of various building layouts on the system dynamics, system performance, employee usage and staff utilization. -Determination of an optimal control strategy for the various areas of the picking.
