Background is a strategic objective of the ZHAW 3 years internationality, as it represents an instrument of differentiation and positioning as a competitive institution on the national, European and global academic and research market. Since the implementation of the Bologna Declaration in 2005, cooperations with foreign universities were increasingly entered in the framework of the ERASMUS of exchange programme. Against this background the Department continued life sciences and facility management of the ZHAW in its strategy (2010-2015) aims to promote the international mobility of students and employees. Central element is the introduction of EMI (English medium instruction) in the BSc environmental engineering. Spring semester 2012 EMI will be introduced as a pilot project in the BSc environmental engineering. Modules are gradually, each in the spring semester, offered in English. Until the end of 2014, 9 modules are taught by 48 ECTS in English to the extent. In the framework of this project, the LCC takes over the task, searching to accompany the transition to English. The results of the research should in the transition to English support guided Bachelor's degrees University of applied sciences institutions and contribute to a language-conscious understanding of subjects at university level. Aim of the research goal of the research is to formulate recommendations and guidance that enable a language-sensitive subjects in English for students, lecturers and school management on the basis of the results and with the involvement of the actors involved. The findings of this study should be transferable to other higher education contexts. Methods there are various survey methods used, including conversation analytic evaluation of video / audio recordings, language testing, focus group discussions, questionnaires and interviews. The exact procedure is set in consultation with the contact persons in the field of study. Results the results of the study be made available to the parties involved and for the public, as well as other institutions of higher education. -Recommendations for the implementation: a core team of lecturers together exchanged experiences on the basis of the results and develop proposals for the implementation of EMI programs. -Workshop: For specialists and language lecturers are planned workshops, in which research findings and trends from the analyses presented and providing a platform for information, discussion and exchange among the instructors form. -Master thesis: Isabelle Thalmann (Neuchâtel of University of) writes her master's thesis on the topic in the project: language competence in English as a lingua franca in third-level education: the case of environmental sciences (working title). -Conference paper and publication: The results are presented to the wider research community and published in trade publications.
