HTW Chur relevance of media critique: media criticism is systematic and reflexive subjects such as the Routi-neprozessen of all those involved in the 'Media trial' and unfolds as observation, description and evaluation of journalistic media and their benefits to society (cf. Schmidt 2005: 23). The communication and media science underscores the relevance of public media criticism - for more than 20 years - and in particular the media journalism given the social importance of journalistic media and its interpretation power in democratic societies (see, for example: Russ-Mohl 1994;) Kreitling 1996; Walt 1997: 23; Krüger / Müller axis 1998). The public, critical engagement with journalistic achievements and its operating environment is must be not least so essential, because reality descriptions are always contingent (cf. Schmidt 2005: 28), can be so different and whose responsibility reminds actors of the public construction of reality, accountable and controlled (Sutter 2010). Actors of the media criticism: it takes as independent instances, which externally observe the media and forcing the public introspection. Media criticism can be made in a Selbstbeobachtungs or a Fremdbeobachtungssetting. Speaking of the latter, if actors media criticism exercise medien(branchen)externe. In the Switzerland it's a variety of media-critical institutions and organisations that are required by law, organs of self control, or civil society organisations and initiatives, making it up to the task, assessing media structures and offers (see Wyss, Sadhu, Stoffel (2012)) Effective media criticism however public and the reflectivity between observers and observed, so a media journalism, which responds to reviews and observed the media system just as critical as other sectors of society also requires (see Blum 2010). Can the media journalism through the theming of structures, rules and ambivalences (Beuthner/Weichert 2005a: 47) Act as a fifth force (Russ-Mohl 2000: 24) and journalism evolve (Russ-Mohl-Fengler 2000; Russ-Mohl/Fengler 2002: 191; Malik 2004: 197), as well as demonstrate to society the sense of responsibility of the media (amine 2001; 2003: 148f; 2005). Theoretical considerations and media studies, on the Switzerland, Germany and the United States-related studies are however skeptical and suggests, that published media criticism by media journalism is a "wallflower" (Walser 2012; cf. Hickethier 2005: 61). Concentration and commercialization processes, as well as the so-called self monitoring case of media journalism problems institutionalization a media critique of journalistic media (bak Weichert 2005a: 48ff;) Eberwein 2010: 148f). Medienblogs and social media as an alternative? Given the inadequacy of the repeatedly observed and the defendant "permanent crisis" of media journalism it is not surprising that under the heading "Media monitoring 2.0" in recent times increasingly discussing the potential and the problems of Medienblogs and social media is triggered media critical functionally (amine 2012; Amine 2008; Eberwein 2010). It is now the question at the center of some investigations, whether blogs and social networks as a new instance of the observation and subjects such as media and journalism could absorb deficits of media journalism. Still, results suggest an ambiguous conclusion. Medienblogs are today not a modern panacea of public media monitoring. The aim of the research project: at the Institute for applied media science of the Zurich University of applied sciences in Winterthur a research infrastructure to be built in 24 months with the "radar media criticism of Switzerland", which can provide annual analyses of the structure and content of the published media criticism in the Switzerland using a multiple method design. This "radar" includes a a structure analysis of critical media instances including Medienblogs and social networks and on the other hand a content analysis is published, critical media contributions by various media-critical actors in the Switzerland (first in the German-speaking countries) in media-journalistic articles but in relevant social networks and Medienblogs. To a research infrastructure is built and established, the corresponding analyses continuously and research economically efficient for one long term comparison regularly (at least annually) can provide. The radar media criticism of Switzerland uses primary, one in developing the course of the project, innovative, computer-aided content analysis (CUI), which can open up as many, but identifiable data sources from the Internet. Knowledge transfer application orientation: In addition to method development, structure, and content analysis the application-oriented project aims at transferring knowledge: the results of "Radar media criticism of Switzerland" will be published for the first time in the course of the project and discussed during a symposium with specific interest groups (critical media organizations, audience councils, Press Council, Ombudsman schemes, UBI, responsibility of media organisations, actors of the media policy etc.). The radar will be in cooperation with the European Journalism Observatory (EJO) indefinitely and its results are regularly (at least annually, and in time comparison) prepares a report and the specific interest groups, as well as a wide audience made accessible and usable (orientation and dialog function).
