: 01.09.2006-further information / further information: This trans-disciplinary research project supported the Swiss municipalities, locally to implement the concept of sustainable development enshrined in the Constitution. These methods are elaborated with the sustainability orientation can be integrated into the management structures and processes. Case studies validated the methods and the experiences summarized in a guideline. With the help of a Community typology as many municipalities is to be a knowledge transfer. Duration: 2.5 years scientific partner: - ETH Zürich, Institute of human-environment systems HES - HSW Luzern, Institute for operational and regional economics IBR implementation partner:-Foundation Ökopolis Switzerland practice partner: - City of Winterthur - city Baden - city of Illnau-Effretikon - municipality of Wiesendangen - municipality of Lengnau AG benefit communities improved management processes and structures, as well as a sustainability-oriented information base can provide a holistic planning and increase planning security, which the community leadership can set their priorities more transparent and establish. -This increases the legitimacy of management decisions and optimizes their benefit/cost ratio over the long term. Products and action module 1: the report?Community typology? creates an overview of the management processes and sustainability orientation of the German Swiss communities. This is an online survey. Module 2: Basic model is based on leadership-relevant processes, structures and content in conjunction with each other. In the method box, the existing management tools are associated with the base model. Two expert workshops will be led by. Module 3: Case studies are recorded actual and desired state of governance structures and processes of the partner municipalities and pointed out possible ways of development for the sustainability-oriented community leadership. Module 4: After an initial phase of implementation of at least one year, evaluations of partner municipalities will take place. Developed knowledge is concentrated in a guide and made available for other communities. : Outlook?Competence centre for sustainability-oriented community leadership? provides accompaniments in the practical implementation of the guidance in communities. Also, it continuously developed the Guide.
