Introduction: Peasant families from rural areas maintain and care for children - as also other families - in particular social situations and adults with disabilities. The salaries ungsleistungen in agriculture have a long history in the Switzerland. In recent years, these services have gained in attention and importance. Family placement (FPO) and network organisations (NWO) place on behalf of social authorities, children/adolescents and adults in care and support families. There was a proper services. Currently, this field of assistance by the redesign of the kid and adults nenschutzrechtes (KESR) and the creation of a new authority structure is strong (KESB) changing. Subject: The system of placements in rural families about FPO/NWO examines exemplary case studies in three cantons and with regard to two target groups (young people, children and people with disabilities). Issues: The study goes after the questioning, which has important care farming (CF) in the various cantons, which changes by the new law and the new structures of authority in relation on CF loom. Background of the study: there is little secured WIS-sen, as a good placement of foster child/client must be carried out and what looks like an op optimal fit between the person you are caring for and supervising family. Secure foundations are missing also in relation to the advanced system of the home or have family placements, the question of participation of inclusion/of the supervised person, members of the family, the role of the listed organization and the KES - and social authorities, as well as the services to provide the FPO/NWO. Methods: various social science methods used In the project such as document analysis and interviews with experts. A group of experts, whose practical knowledge is incorporated into the project results plays an important role. Objectives of the study: the report should serve different decision makers and stakeholders as a help for the private practice:-the study provides an overview of the system of which will be distributed in the three cantons, in a situation which is characterised by strong change. -Aim is to capture the opportunities and challenges in these developments and to determine in which direction desirable and promising developments by CF could go. -From the carried out analysis, the comparisons between the cantonal strategies, but also from the discussion with experts within and outside of the project, strategies vor¬geschlagen and proposals for action will be developed to named, possible potential. Results of the study will be available in November 2013
