Attack Aargauer catering waste this study deals with organic waste from kitchens in the canton of Aargau in Switzerland. In the course of the studies, it was shown that the organic portion of waste per meal is 124 grams in a large kitchen. Two sources are responsible for this organic waste. For one, there are cooked food which is left behind by guests on the plates or too much prepared in the kitchen. On the other hand, there are uncooked waste arising in the equipping and preparing the food. These two sources are each a fraction of the waste, the third group is the oil. The groups can and must be disposed of differently. The studies showed a yearly amount of around 12 039; 000 of tonnes of organic waste from kitchens in the canton of Aargau in Switzerland. Of which are 4 / 5 from the private catering (restaurant, hotel, canteen), and 1/5 of the public sector (hospitals, homes, military). This waste consists of ever around 6000 tons of dining and upgrading waste. The oil is a small lot with 350 tons, is a very interesting group but because of its high energy density. The calculated totals are comparable with the loads from other studies, which have collected data for the North-Western Switzerland and the canton of Berne. For Swiss cantons of central country, catering waste can be expected with a quantity of 20 kg per inhabitant per year. Aargauer catering waste in the feeding okay recovery 6500 tonnes, so half of the annual waste. Here, in particular the Group of cooked waste plays an important role. Around 4,000 tonnes of waste will be composted, this is only to uncooked upgrading waste. Around 900 tons are burned, this has come to mostly food waste and about 300 tons of dining as well as upgrading waste in a fermentation. The 350 tonnes of oil are used for bio-diesel. A ban on feeding for fear of new animal diseases could very soon be reality after the EU also in the Switzerland, 6500 tonnes of organic waste in a different recovery path would have to be fed. Here the thermophilic digestion in the foreground, is what in the and at the borders of the canton of Aargau in the expansion and ensures good coverage in the future. In the fermentation, bio-gas is extracted from kitchen waste. Valuable substances are so not only energy used, but returned in the connection also back a materially in the circuit. This meets the requirements of the environmental protection act. Conclusion currently in the canton of Aargau in Switzerland is a useful and reliable waste management concept for the catering waste in operation through the combination of feeding, composting and fermentation. Feeding as a disposal path should be dropped in the future, the course has been set correctly. The fermentation is located in the expansion and the cover is similar to good, like those of the KVA. It is useful to prevent a burn of this waste fraction and to promote the digestion.
