The sports Office Winterthur plans developing a concept of "Space for exercise and sports in Winterthur" in collaboration with other agencies. The main objective is to make Winterthur to a well-connected movement, providing opportunity for physical activities as broad sections of the population. This project is supported in the framework of the sport-political concept of the Federal Council financial and personnel from the Federal Office for sports (BASPO). This involves not only Mountaineer to cross over in the sense of the FOSPO, but - according to the various interests - to good quality and quantity requirements for non-motorized traffic, semi-natural habitats and ecological connectivity in the settlement area, open spaces for children and adolescents, formulated planning and structural measures in the interest of the integration of minorities and generally to spatially good prerequisites for a high quality of life and attractiveness of Winterthur. The strong synergies to be used between all these interests. The concept is based on an inventory of existing rooms as well as a needs analysis. The project includes five modules, of which two survey modules have already been completed. The Institute for cooperative planning and sports development IKPS was commissioned for the other modules. A module is aimed to determine the needs of children through expert interviews. In a further module, detailed studies are developed in two neighborhoods about formal and informal Mountaineer to cross over. Based on the preparatory work in the last module using the method of "cooperative planning" - a participatory process with the involvement of the local population - determined where there is lack of Bewegungsräumen, where obstacles prevent access to Bewegungsräumen, where developed new Mountaineer to cross over and already existing must be protected and improved. A planning group consisting of 25 persons of Winterthur City Council, the Canton and the Federal Government, as well as from the population, compiled the results and ensures that the results are practical and accepted. As part of the project, there is also an evaluation of the developed concept. To do this, the city of Winterthur commissioned the Institute for sustainable development (INE) of the Zurich University of applied sciences in Winterthur (Zurich).
