EJTA 1 Initial position At the AGM in 2006 in Estonia the EJTA European Journalism Training Association has developed the Tartu-declaration. In the declaration ten main journalistic competences each with five journalistic qualifications are set out. Although all of these 50 qualifications are of great importance, new trends and developments within journalism anda lack of resources forces journalism schools to decide on which parts of the competence profile they lay their main focus in their education. How important the EJTA members (mostly heads of journalism schools) weight the different competences was explored in a first pre-study. In a next step was investigated how professional key persons across 20 European countries weight the different elements of the EJTA Competence Profile. 2 Goal of the survey The main goal of the third phase of the Competence Research Project is to find out how students and teachers from different European countries weight the importance of the ten main competences respectively the fifty qualifications and how they believe current and future developments in journalism will affect the relative weight of each of these elements in the coming ten years. 3 Method and Service The questionnaire that was designed for the second phase that was designed for the second phase will be used again. The questionnaire will be completed with some questions to get more information about the respondents (independent variables). These variables will be limited to: - which institution do you work/study? - is it initial (university, polytechnic/applied sciences) or mid-career? - in which year (student)? - what subject do you teach (teachers): journalism/other? The survey will be realized as online survey. To spread the link to the online-questionnaire a contact person (EJTA-member) for each participating country has to be designated. The contact persons select the respondents (150 students and 50 teachers from each country) to which the link to the questionnaire will be forwarded. The outcomes of the EJTA Competence Research Project will be summarized in a research report (commented tables) which will become available for all EJTA members and the headlines will be presented at the AGM of EJTA in London in May 2011.
