This interdisciplinary project the conservation or increase the quality of life of elderly in retirement centers is sought through increased passive and active use of the garden. As a consequence, are expected to include the medical expenses for the elderly to reduce. In addition the attractiveness to increase sustainable age centers outdoor tailored specifically to their inhabitants, where new therapies are held. A pilot plant based on scientific-sociological surveys should be realized in the retirement Center Gibeleich (Opfikon/Glattbrugg, Switzerland), tested and evaluated. Demand is designed for such grounds in this innovative project. The sociological surveys in the retirement Center Gibeleich (spring 2003) served as an example to determine the needs and skills of residents and home staff in the garden. Based, the concept for the transformation of outer space was made on the results of these surveys, as well as a landscape architectural analysis. Result of the planning and subsequent construction phase of implementation is partly a free air therapy room with a newly developed high-bed type, a commercial, as well as strolling garden. In addition, a concept for the maintenance of the garden and the garden was formulated. A guide has been developed for the activation-therapeutic work with age Centre garden plants by the Hochschule Wädenswil in collaboration with the school for activation therapy in Burgdorf. He serves as the basis for the training of "Garden therapy for activation therapists", jointly offered by the two schools from spring 2006. First experiences with the garden redesigned in early 2004 were recorded in autumn 2004 and evaluated. The results show that the project in the eyes of all those involved is a success. The main objective, the contribution to the preservation or improvement of the quality of life of the inhabitants was reached. The duration of stay of the elderly in the garden has due is clearly active activities during the activation therapy, enabling care, but also by increased passive use, through the new garden items, increases. The detection of reducing the medical expenses as a result of the increase of the quality of life was apart from inter alia for reasons of data protection. Another goal, the increased appeal and demand for this new type of garden, has been achieved. So in 2004 some people on the waiting list of the retirement Center Gibeleich have can be, where the garden with a reason for the selection is. A further evaluation of the projects will be whether this trend continues, in the winter 2006/2007 show. Many garden tours and garden projects newly initiated through this project in other retirement centers show the increased demand. Success factors of the project identified by the authors: reliability of all project staff, careful exchange of information and participation of all stakeholders, comprehensive groundwork and careful planning and successful recruiting pages of the retirement Center.
