The project has the objective to monitor the development of the canton of URI by hand by sustainability principles and control. In particular, the impact of the "Holiday resort in Andermatt" project and the commissioning of the NEAT on the ge the entire canton of should be observed. Because spatial adjustments were made in the framework of the project "Holiday resort in other matt", which are associated with clear development lungszielen, Central is to monitor the development and achievement of objectives in the region. In the computer-based Raumbeobachtungs system GINES is used, which currently is being developed in cooperation with the canton of Berne by the ZHAW Department of geoinformatics. This is with the help of GIS sustainability indicators in a spatial context. This he enables demonstrating the long-term spatial development and the derivation of alternative courses of action. Effects of spatial relevance measures should by zykli-sche new versions of indicators within existing management processes are incorporated into the system and therefore allow a systematic monitoring. Target and indicator selection from a prepared set of spatially rele relevant sustainable development indicators will be developed in participatory settings. While representatives of cantonal and communal, as well as the resident companies, social institutions, population and NGO's are involved. By monitoring can conflict areas be identified at an early stage and captured by continuous, institutionalized communication of different stakeholders and edited in a common strategy. Are formed in different scenarios and estimate potential effects to identify areas which are central for the desired development. In the fields of action, measures in a participatory environment be developed and to set. Thus, in Intermunicipal Cooperation regional Erfolgsfakto-ren for a sustainable regional development analyses and rebuilt. Objectives of the project: • overall objective: promotion of sustainable development in the canton of URI: • competitiveness (technical capital, natural capital, human capital) • quality of life (social capital, natural capital) • objective decision-making and strategy formation of spatial development in the canton of URI • institutionalization of monitoring system • identifying fields of action and measures
