The eLearning program of nutrition is currently created and used from autumn 2010. The module to a health contribution in the field of nutrition and health and empower target groups to assume responsibility as well as skills, which allow the design of a healthy diet offer for their diet. Conditions are: • knowledge components of a healthy diet • adequate body and health awareness (settings) • a range of foods it continues to apply, to show the attractiveness of healthy nutrition, by: • the indirect benefits (E.g. physical fitness) is made aware of • experienced healthy eating as pleasure is thus provided the delicious healthy diet in the foreground. Responsibility E-learning nutrition: claudia.schuetz@zhaw.ch E-learning nutrition is a subproject of the project Bapoly. Bapoly means basic principles of Oecotrophology and is a joint project of Zurich and the University of Zurich. The project was launched in 2001 with the aim to develop a modern and interactive learning platform for schools. Another part of project of Baboly is E-learning materials. The e-learning platform of tools and building materials for the course of facility management has been completed and supplemented with interactive tasks and issues. Since April 2010 eBooks on the subject of wood, glass, natural stone, concrete and artificial stone, ceramic, metal, plastics, full and semi-synthetic fibers cotton, rope, silk, and wool, which since April 2010 available. With this interactive form of learning students are given the opportunity to supplement their knowledge and to deepen further according to your interests. The content is largely due to the focus of the facility manager, aligned with the facility manager. The entire life cycle of the materials is in the focus. The eBooks give information about the manufacture and use of different materials, and properties and areas of use, cleaning, and sustainability. Geared the students in the ItkA can!, solve the interactive task tool, questions and review their own learning progress immediately. Responsibility E-learning materials: anja.fuchs@zhaw.ch ItkA interactive task tool! used in both projects. The concept comes from Dr. Wolfgang Sahoo. ItkA! is an interactive software that supports task - and problem-based learning. Students should be encouraged through this learning software to the independent acquisition of knowledge. Tasks and questions are categorized according to the taxonomy of Benjamin Bloom divided into different learning levels. In the free area of the exercise the students can decide independently which topics and which taxonomy level he wants to practice. The tasks are collected depending on the selection criteria by random system from a database. Lecturers can activate tests for certain chapters and learning levels. While editing a test the learner will be informed constantly about his current level of performance. At the end of each test block, he receives an evaluation of his performance, as well as the course average. The so-called "battle of knowledge" is a playful variation between training and test. Case studies available are for the acquisition of knowledge at the highest level of learning (synthesis, evaluation). Case studies have a game character; a distinction is made between the gold-oriented case study (collection of gold crowns) and goal-oriented case study (reaching a last question). ItkA! is an empty vessel that can be filled with any content in different modules. The usage is especially efficient when several project partners each jointly develop a module and use. Currently, three task modules are developed: materials, food, and household appliances. ItkA responsibility! and coordination Bapoly: claudia.schmucki@zhaw.ch
