Family start: Project for a co-ordinated and tailor-made support for families with newborn situation care after the birth of a child is shifting increasingly from the hospital internal in the hospital-external area. The introduction of the case fee (Swiss DRG) in 2012 has reinforced the trend, that mother and child soon to be released after the birth home. At the time is however hospital Ext. no co-ordinated provision, which guarantees the necessary care at home after hospital release families with newborns. Objective the aim of the FamilyStart project is to provide safe, coordinated and tailor-made care for families with newborns. Improving basic security after birth promotes a healthy start of life, strengthens the well-being of mother, child and family and makes an important contribution to the prevention of diseases. Rule different processes can be detected early and appropriate measures taken. Also families with existing problems can, handled comprehensively and requirements in their familiar environment which benefits the affected family as well as the reduction of health care costs. Free practicing midwives in a project team project FamilyStart Zurich as a follow-up can be guaranteed in the canton of Zurich of from time to time, not every family with a newborn, teamed up to develop a new concept of postnatal care. Dr. Elisabeth Kurth, who already manages the project FamilyStart of the two Basel, a project manager with great expertise in the Postpartum health care could be won. The Institute for midwives, Zurich University of applied sciences, the Swiss tropical and public health Institute and the Bern University of applied sciences are involved in the scientific monitoring of the project. 1 step: Needs assessment a needs assessment conducted by the project FamilyStart Zurich of postnatal care offer for professionals in the canton of Zurich shows a clear interest in a clear power structure, networking and collaboration, as well as uniform procedures. A thorough analysis of the need for parents with newborns in the Basel region revealed the need for easy access to advice and mediation by professionals after the birth. 2 step: Developing coordinated care model the supply model defines a co-ordinated and needs follow-up of families and newborn to the hospital exit. With a 24 h helpline for parents and a professional coordination between hospitals, midwives, and other involved professional groups a support network will be built up, which ensures the after-sales service around the year. The 24 h helpline has therefore the following points: 24 h telephone consultation, triage and mediation/transfer to parenting advice, medical services and relief services and a guaranteed midwife mediation for the domestic follow-up of newborns and their families. 3 step: Realization of coordinated care model pilot project the developed model for a coordinated supply is then in a pilot project in the practice implemented. In the implementation phase, the supply model is scientifically evaluated and optimized based on the results.
