Lead Centre for technology assessment the demographic development, skills shortage and the increasing economic pressure on the health care system, that increasingly technical solutions are considered for the supervision and care of people. A technology assessment funded by TA-Swiss has been carried out, the current situation and macro trends to robotics in supervision and health care to make. A litera turanalyse, an environmental analysis, focus group interviews and a workshop with experts in the fields of politics, economy, society, ethics, technology and law have been performed. Based on the findings of three scenarios were developed to possible future developments in the use of Robotics in care and health care. The analyses have shown that the area of Robotics is characterized by the diversity and various complexity of devices. Innovation in the field of technology is a key driver for new applications in the health sector. The discharge of professional and non-professional users is one of the opportunities of the use of Robotics in healthcare. Technical innovation can represent a gain in autonomy and mobility and contribute to an improved integration and quality of life for patients and their families. At the institutional level, robotics offers a potential for rationalization in the area of organisational and logistical processes. Total seen the quality of care of patients ten workers and dependent persons may turn out, in a simultaneous discharge of nurses and alleviate the shortage, improve. One of the risks, that through the use of robots the direct contacts between the patient and the health personnel decreases, which could affect the well-being of patients. Another risk is particularly vul-nerablen persons, which itself can give no consent to the use of robots. The data collected by the device's potential for abuse seems awkward. Untreated, who is liable for damages, which robots cause is next. Institutional institutional level is to be feared that the economic pressure could lead to the preferred usage of devices, which are economically although beneficial, but could result in disadvantages for those concerned. Inadequate regulations, E.g. in the liability law, privacy and ethics, already cause risks for people in the research, testing, and application of such devices. Measures, such as for example the clarification of liability law and data protection, are therefore already necessary and cannot be in an indefinite future moved who-the. A proactive and controlling policy seems appropriate, at the same time to take advantage of opportunities and mitigate risks. The recommendations for the use of Robotics in supervision and health care include legal adjustments with regard to the liability, data protection, and Prü fung and compliance with ethical guidelines in particular as regards persons not able to consent. Also promoting interdisciplinary and applied research involving are recommended by users and stakeholders as well as the promotion of health technology assessment and the social debate about the topic of «Technology in the supervision and health care», to ensure that the access justice.
