: 01.10.2010 ProjektpartnerInnen / Project partner(s) : Complementa Investment Controlling AG / ZKB / AlternativeSoft / Pensionskasse Stadt Zürich Die Mehrheit der institutionellen Investoren hat neben traditionellen Obligationen und Aktienanlagen auch alternative Anlagen wie Hedgefunds oder Private Equity in ihren Portfolios. Mit dem Projekt sollen Werk-zeuge und Verfahren mit Multifaktormodellen zur Verbesserung der Anlageentscheide und des Investment-prozesses, insbesondere auch unter Berücksichtigung von Alternativen Anlagen und Hedge Funds mit nicht-normalverteilten Renditen, entwickelt werden. The deliverables of the project are twofold: - A 17-factor model to measure alpha and beta exposures for investments and portfolios. - An optimizer dealing with non-normal returns distributions, tail-dependence and a core-satellite framework. 17-factor model The 17 factor model is used for the measurement of the performance and the risk characteristics of traditional and alternative investments and is useful for any portfolio. The 17 factors include traditional and alternative market factors as well as option-like features measured by vega and gamma factors. Extensive applications with the 17 factor model were done for a large public pension plan which was one of the projects business partners. The model serves also as an amended version for the fund of hedge fund (FoHF) platform Hedgegate (www.hedgegate.com), and in particular for the performance and risk measurement of FoHFs. Optimizer The optimizer handles non-normal returns of each separate asset, models tail-dependence with non-normal copulas and brings together satellite investments characterized by alpha and beta loadings with respect to an optimized core portfolio. The optimization of the core portfolio can be done – besides classical Markowitz optimization - with respect to risk budgets for each asset whereby the risk is measured by the expected shortfall based on returns from the family of generalized hyperbolic distributions. An alternative optimization algorithm uses the non-parametric Sharpe Omega measure. The optimizer’s prototype is programmed in “R” and allows dealing with several customer-based restrictions such as transaction costs, turnover, risk budgets and maximum weights among others. Test cases reveal encouraging results compared to Markowitz optimized portfolios, particularly with respect to the risk reduction obtained through the inclusion of alternative investments as satellite assets. It confirms the assumption that financial returns do differ from a normal distribution and tend to display higher correlation during crises, thus supporting our approach that takes this tail-dependence into account with the help of non-normal copulas. The experience from optimizing asset allocation portfolios for one of the business partners also shows promising results, and that the computing performance allows optimization for a realistic number of assets and restrictions. A second business partner is going to use the cutting edge optimizer as part of its consulting process and a third business partner builds an interface for commercial use of the optimizer.
