Urban health service Zürich project completed. The city of Zurich tested preventive counseling and home visits for persons aged 70 years and over. Various standardised interventions will be developed by the project team of the city. The project is scientifically evaluated by R care E. (Data collection, analysis) Preventive advice for older women and men are new outpatient services to promote self care ability in the Switzerland. Systematic evaluations of such offers are urgently needed. The newly established Department for preventive counseling Spitex Zurich offers a targeted health advice for women and men over the age of 65 years. It aims to promote the independence of living at home older residents and inhabitants of the city of Zurich. Care professionals offer a previously recorded healthy heitsprofil (health profile, geriatrics University of Bern) the interested parties within of preventive home visits to individual consultations with the help of standard interventions. The ZHAW has commissioned to document the new offer and evaluate. The descriptive evaluation study of the ZHAW accompanied this project of the preventive advice, using a chance sample of 400 people. Included are selected quality indicators to the structure, process and as a result of the consultation. Likewise, socio-demographic and clinical data of clients and clients are systematically recorded. Structure: The consultation effort is expressed in time and human resources, as well as the infrastructure required. Process: The counseling process is represented by data about the activities and goals of the clients and clients. This uses a specially developed method of categorization. (Client-goal-categorization, CGC ZHAW). The various consulting activities of caregivers are also systematically. Results: The overall satisfaction of the clients and clients with the advice, as well as their assessment of the benefits of advice by means of an evaluation questionnaire (ANP-intervention questionnaire, ANP-IQ-ZHAW) charged. Through the systematic evaluation of data, it is possible to optimise preventive consultations of nursing professionals to promote the self-care ability systematically to represent and the offer if necessary.
