Problem statement: The Zurich Government Council commissioned end July 2008 a postulate of Kan - clay Council, to show the development of diagnosis and treatment mental interference conditions in children and adolescents over the last five years; a special attention is paid to treatment with psychotropic drugs. The Kantonsärztliche service is now commissioned a study, which involves identifying the current knowledge of the treatment of mental disorders in children and adolescents. Questions: Four questions should be examined in: • inventory of disease frequency, treatment means and on wall-th treatment of those diseases of that are usually treated with psychotropic drugs can be. • Analysis of the effectiveness, appropriateness and cost effectiveness of psychotropic drugs treat­ment in the three most common mental disorders in childhood and adolescence. If only - the: comparison of the sole psychotropic drugs treatment in comparison with other forms of appropriate therapy or combinations of psychotropic drugs treatment and other treatment-lung. • Representation of potential changes and shifts in terms of the forms of therapy in the last ten years. Are to answer • identification of important open questions based on the findings of previous research and the fundamental enough for the good care in the field of child and adolescent psychiatry. Presenting a proposal for a concept to the reply tung of these questions, as well as its cost and cost estimation methodology: systematic literature search in established databases, which provides for a differentiation of disease frequencies, effectiveness, practicality, economy and changes of forms of therapy according to gender and development phases. Furthermore, an expert interview was conducted during the start-up phase of the study. Results: • overall prove both psychotherapy or psychosocial interventions also pharmacological treatments as effective in the treatment of most common psychi specific disorders in children and adolescents. The combined use of both shows Interventi-onsarten tend to be positive effects, but their study situation is problem statement: the Zurich Government Council was commissioned end July 2008 with a postulate of Kan - clay Council to show the development of diagnosis and treatment mental interference conditions in children and adolescents over the last five years; a special eye attention is the treatment with psychotropic drugs. The Kantonsärztliche service is now commissioned a study, which involves identifying the current knowledge of the treatment of mental disorders in children and adolescents. Questions: Four questions should be examined in: • inventory of disease frequency, treatment means and on wall-th treatment of those diseases of that are usually treated with psychotropic drugs can be. • Analysis of the effectiveness, appropriateness and cost effectiveness of psychotropic drugs treat­ment in the three most common mental disorders in childhood and adolescence. If only - the: comparison of the sole psychotropic drugs treatment in comparison with other forms of appropriate therapy or combinations of psychotropic drugs treatment and other treatment-lung. • Representation of potential changes and shifts in terms of the forms of therapy in the last ten years. Are to answer • identification of important open questions based on the findings of previous research and the fundamental enough for the good care in the field of child and adolescent psychiatry. Presenting a proposal for a concept to the reply tung of these questions, as well as its cost and cost estimation methodology: systematic literature search in established databases, which provides for a differentiation of disease frequencies, effectiveness, practicality, economy and changes of forms of therapy according to gender and development phases. Furthermore, an expert interview was conducted during the start-up phase of the study. Results: • overall prove both psychotherapy or psychosocial interventions also pharmacological treatments as effective in the treatment of most common psychi specific disorders in children and adolescents. The combined application shows tend to be positive effects of both Interventi onsarten, but their study situation is currently still narrow. • The pharmacological treatment shows well-hedged positive effects especially with two images of disorder: anxiety disorders and ADHD. The latter show inter sensual Psychopharma-ka (in particular MPH or 'Ritalin') more positive effects than psychotherapy. • The effectiveness of psychotherapeutic interventions is for all of the errors, which is the most powerful effects in the treatment of anxiety disorders. • The study location to the cost-effectiveness of interventions for mental disorders by kin countries and young people is narrow, the findings are relatively consistent with the evaluation of the effectiveness of interventions.
