Fachstelle Genderstudies ZFH according to the scenario of the Federal Office for statistics is expected after 2013, with a decline in the numbers of students. The universities of applied sciences have to offer therefore innovative training, to attract young women and men. A technical university education, which is attractive to women and men, taking into account four criteria: Firstly the problem-based and project-oriented learning in the foreground must be in the pedagogical concept. Secondly, the context dependency of technology to address is in the learning. Third is the value system to change direction of divergence within the professional culture, i.e. the didactic knowledge of teachers must be constantly updated. Lecturers should take into account the different technical prior experience of students and thus contribute to the erosion of gender stereo typisierender competence write-ups. Fourthly, the transformation of labour markets requires a stronger customer orientation, which must be taken into account with interdisciplinary knowledge. The aim of the project is to prepare the available knowledge and to develop strategies and practical measures for gender technical courses and genderkompetenten lessons based on in the three studies electrical engineering, Business Informatics and biotechnology of the Zurich University of applied sciences (ZHAW). The results are published. To proceed: first the curricula of the three courses of study are analyzed, focused questioning students and the literature evaluated for location-based. Secondly, the Studiengangsleitenden and teachers by means of interviews, Grup g and workshops in the sensitization process to the gender structure of degree programmes are involved. Thirdly, concrete contents and methods for the transformation of technical sciences and gender new are developed based on these results together with the responsible. The second and third part is strongly oriented and is at the heart of the project. Short-term goal is to sensitize the responsible actors and to develop a concrete implementation Toolkit for the ZHAW. Medium and long term the technical programmes of the ZHAW should be extended to the gender. The published results of the project are the other Swiss universities of applied sciences available. The project lasts from December 2006 until end of May 2008 and is financed by the Federal Office for professional education and technology OPET.
