In the project descriptors should be for a subset of communicative competences in sign languages on empirical way determined which characterize good differentiable language knowledge levels in the learning of sign language as a foreign and second language. These descriptors which form the basis of a Europe-wide framework for determination, characterization, standardization and testing of language skills in the learning of sign language as a foreign and second language in General. A standardized description of the necessary communicative skills and language skills regardless of the first language of the learners already exists for phonetic languages in the criteria grid of the common European framework of reference for languages (CEFR, also known as CEFR). The loud language grid is transferable in particular due to the modality difference between sound - and Gebärden¬Sprachen, but also - as far as the communicative skills - language systematic reasons not readily on sign languages. Areas that largely communicated in phonetic languages as non-verbal signals, which however often include character sprachsystema¬tischen in Gebärden¬Sprachen as non-manual shares of a signing statement to be added. In addition, contact linguistic skills are important, such as the reception and production capacity of the finger alphabet and the mouth image for the use of sign languages. Sign languages (GS) use in addition to sign sequences (two-dimensional) as a design medium, where meanings are both simultaneously also sequentially encoded in the form of expression which as three-dimensional space. Although GS do not have a writing system, but about types of text, so that the range of writing skills differently must be represented as in according to languages in a frame of reference. Video recordings make an access to them. Gebärdete presentations, stories, instructions, reports, etc. differ from each other, so as well as written text types and relevant Textualitätsmerkmale can be thus identified in such records, whose meaning is analyzed and interpreted. In the project descriptors for the competencies of textuality in the German Swiss are to be sign language (DARIA) empirically collected and analyzed. In a work period of 36 months should be what descriptors in DARIA depict the sign-language skills and foreign language learning of these skills each corresponds to which GER GS level clarified empirically. (Approved at the 24.09.2014)
