Introduction before the background of the political debate on the construction of minarets in the Switzerland called the Zurich Cantonal Parliament the Government Council in December 2006 with a postulate to create a report on the situation of the Muslim population in the canton of Zurich. The preparation of the report has been transferred to the Department of Justice and of the Interior (JHA) who want to support the report on a broad-based study. The study is to identify not only areas of concern, but provide also as concrete fundamentals of to any measures. Questions: The following objectives were formulated: 1 the study of the position of the Muslim population in the canton of Zurich to from a government perspective selected policy areas in the context of specific studies investigate.The policy areas are education, health, social assistance, penalties - and measures. The area-specific studies make up the bulk of the study. 2. the study is modelled on the governmental activities at cantonal and municipal level and represent points of contact between State activities in the respective policy area and the Muslim population. This should be pointed out also, if there are problems in this context. As interest in the measures already taken, to avoid any problems. Topics related to religious affiliation and directly in the context of the religion are at the Centre of interest. 3. the study should generate actionable recommendations that are suitable, targeted to address any areas of concern. In a solution-oriented approach is essential. 4. in selected policy areas (see above), it will be investigated whether any areas of concern have their origin in religion or in the origin, the nationality of the social strata or in other aspects. Method the planned study should extend across four key phases: phase 1: exploration of the research topic and field; Phase 2: Analysis of quantitative data (especially for question 1 and possibly 2); Stage 3: Qualitative analysis of problem-centred interviews with relevant stakeholders in the policy field; Phase 4: reporting results due to a lean data location can be made statements only with reservations to the Zahlmuslimischer patients/inside the hospitals of the canton. The evaluation of the statistics by eight acute hospitals of the canton of Zurich shows that the average proportion of Muslim patients inside is around seven percent. In addition, trends can be displayed. So, the proportion of Muslims inside compared to the population should be increased among young and male patients inside. Accordingly, it is to assuming that in addition to the structure of the population in the catchment area of a hospital plays a role also the gender - and in particular the age distribution of patients inside for the concrete portion of muslimischerPatienten students. Within the framework of interviews with ten hospital staff from two acute hospitals as well as 5 Muslim people closer illuminated points of contact between the exercise of religion from Muslim patients students and hospital operation. A few problems in connection with the exercise of religion from Muslim patients inside the hospital were perceived from the perspective of the hospital staff. The respondents Muslime/innen beurteiltendies partly critical. It can be concluded that a sensitive handling guilt is viewed on the sense of shame and the religious dietary laws of patients inside as particularly important. Dealing so is doctors/internal, nourishing in the hospitals but by both sides - and Muslime/innen − as positive. From the Muslim side, the missing pastoral offer for Muslime/innen as problematic was assessed first and foremost. They also wanted a more direct approach to religious needs of patients/Interior and a more active information policy pages of hospitals. Further revealed the analysis of secondary data from a written survey of Muslim migrants, that this report mainly positive experiences with the health care sector in the canton of Zurich. Critical aspects related to the communication / communication with the medical professionals (nurses, physicians/Interior) and the embedding or representative of their own culture in the health sector and thus also the religion as a part of the culture. So many Muslime/innen wish you a care by professionals who have knowledge of the culture of origin of the patients inside.
