Centre of excellence health and age, St. Gallen objective of elderly people are exposed to an increased risk of falling. Falls cause injuries and change loss often in the long term the independence and immobility. An important goal, pursued by physicians, nurses, therapists, and social services is to prevent falls and fall to reduce injury risks, therefore. The following questions should be answered by means of literature: 1 what assessments and actions people in old age with risk of falling or already made falls can be identified and found be? 2. What preventive measures and interventions are suitable to reduce fall risks and risks of injury? Target is to develop an inter professional fall path for the "competence center health and age St. Gallen". Methodical approach, there have been studies of occupational groups considered doctors, nursing staff, physiotherapy and occupational therapy in the hospital and long-term care facilities. 1 database search and free hand search in medical and Social Sciences databases have been researched article with release date from 2000 to 2010. Most meta-analyses, systematic reviews, and reviews were included in the evaluation. Guidance was sought by free hand search. Guidelines provide recommendations for decision-making processes and practices for specific health problems and disease patterns. They provide an overview of appropriate assessments, prevention measures and interventions. The recommendations of the evidence-based guidelines are taken up in the analysis tables. 2. evaluation of the literature was the literature on the basis of the statements in the abstracts in tables sorted by: 1 environmental prevention: all measures aimed at environmental adaptation, E.g. adaptation of living space, tools, shoes, Hüftprotektoren etc. 2nd person-related interventions: training measures such as functional training, ADL-training, cognitive or behavioural training, Tai Chi etc. 3. Education: all education for patients, relatives and staff. 4. assessment: Tests, tools, and other assessments to the Grobscreening, differentiated survey of risk factors and evaluation of interventions. Results there are many studies on the subject of fall prevention. 213 studies could be included in the evaluation. Fall prevention should be multidisciplinary and multicausal aligned. The most important factors represent review of medication and environmental adaptation. Continuous training of staff has proved to be effective, while patient education show a small effect on the rate of fall. Functional exercises should include balance and strength training and involve falling anxiety and self-efficacy. Interventions should be tuned individually to patients or to special risk groups. Only a few studies were found about patients with dementia. Monitoring by persons or electronic systems, secure environment and education have proved effective for this group of patients. Interventions should not restrict the independence and activities of patients. Fixations are neither ethically acceptable nor reduce injuries.
