Active and frequent exercises are an effective treatment of back pain. This project developed a device (back trainer) that allows patients to exercise, giving the device a direct feedback on the quality of the exercises the patient regardless of a physical therapist. The Institute of physiotherapy was instrumental in the development of the back coach and has formulated the requirements for the back trainer with the involvement of specialized physical therapists and with studies of healthy individuals and patients. Representative exercises for back patients were selected and tested using the Optotrak system on 20 healthy individuals. The goal of this test was to determine the optimum location of the sensors and the kind of feedback. In addition, the practicality of the system in a clinical study was investigated. As a result of this project, a catalogue of requirements for the back coach could be created on the basis of 20 exercises often used in physical therapy. The back trainer gives real-time feedback about posture, stability and movement of the spine. The results of the evaluation of the back trainer user analysis show that the user experience is positive and the therapeutic use of the back trainer as high to very high is classified. Implemented the numerous suggestions for improvement of the patient and the therapist to the optimization of the back trainers, high user acceptance in the later application in the field of rehabilitation of low back pain can be achieved. A follow-up project is in preparation. The project was successfully completed. Publications: Feasibility of extracting features of unsafe lifting from motion data. Bansal, D., Kool, j., Schenk, p., Coigny, F., Degen, M., Zimmermann, A. KTI Conference, Sept. 2007 Brodbeck, D., Degen, M., Kool, j., Scheer knife, M., O'Neill, p, Neuhaus, C., et al. 2009 back coach: computer-aided therapy system with augmented feedback for the lower back. International Conference on health informatics, Porto / Portugal. This post was awarded the best paper award 2009.
