This project is completed. Perform follow-up events students are underrepresented at the universities of applied sciences in the Switzerland, this is especially true for the scientific and technical programmes. It is, therefore, an important goal to motivate students to make a study and finish. A central role is attached to the design of the teaching: what targets are set which content selected, how are the faculty, how learner, how join them the students go and moderate them differentially on the various learning strategies group processes, like go a? For teaching at the universities of applied sciences, there is little research projects, pursuing these issues from a gender perspective. Didactical concepts which take up such issues, have influence on the motivation of learners and are often unintentional and influenced subconsciously by gender role stereotypes. Since the reform and improvement of the quality of teaching (Bologna-reform) social processes accept a a larger room (way of the frontal) to process monitoring, coaching, teamwork and others an awareness of the Faculty is required for the Genderfaktor in teaching and the diverse composition of students. The project developed a simple tool with which the teaching staff of the universities of applied sciences in relation to their mediation skills in the areas of gender and diversity can be trained. Due to positive experiences in the classroom and workplace equality created a video on DVD with a short explanatory guide has worksheets. The video contains relevant scenes from everyday University of applied sciences (lecture, seminar, research group, coaching, exam), and lasts approximately 20 minutes. The presentation should stimulate the reflection of social processes in the interaction in the classroom and not educational work. The video can be used for the training of lecturers but also for discussion with students and to raise the awareness of leaders in higher education. The video was produced in the second half of 2006 and 2007 presented to the public. It was published under: some San Juan, Sylvia; Bolli-Schaffner, Ursula; Heimberg, Liliana: Viewpoint: women in technical and economic training. Promoting equality of opportunity. An awareness-raising film with information and material for use in the education / ZHW Winterthur (ed.) - lengerich: Pabst, 2007 ISBN/ISSN: 978-3-89967-396-8
