Cooperation project of the Zurich University of the Arts (ZHdK), Zurich University of applied sciences (ZHAW) and Pädagogische Hochschule Zürich (PHZH) in the framework of the federal programme equal opportunities between women and men in Fachhochschulen BBT scientific employees with an in the power spectrum of the colleges is becoming increasingly important. The task increase implies that the colleges assign means construction members increasingly tasks in teaching, counselling, student assistance, service and research projects. Accompanying career patterns and paths should be developed for the members of the central building, adapted to the situation. Important it will be scientific employees with reference to this, on the diverse, gender-specific professional aspirations and lifestyles. Highly qualified employees to keep and promote the career conditions will make fair. This relevance actually existing knowledge on innovative means of building support in the Switzerland is amazingly low. Also at the Zurich University of applied sciences (ZFH) the fields of work and conditions with views of teaching, F S and services are diffuse staked out, and there is little clarity about the career paths that allow the schools means building members. With views of the gender category, there is no secure knowledge of the scientific staff in contrast to the scientific staff are confronted with the opportunities and difficulties. This project examined at the three universities of ZFH - namely the PH CDE-rich, ZHdK and the ZHAW - such as women and men in the mid-level of their work situation perceive, they develop the career ideas and future prospects and where they see potential stumbling blocks for their professional advancement. By geschlechterho-mogener group discussions with scientific staff on the one and interviews with policy makers on the other hand should the gender specific-fishing aspects worked out in these points of view and thereby shown on the background of the institutional framework of similarities and differences between the three schools. The project is included in the overall strategy of the ZFH and provides evidence-based knowledge to the perspective of the scientific employees and employees from the perspective of gender studies for this strategy to be developed the ZFH. It lasts from October 2011 to may 2012 and is financed by the Federal Office for professional education and technology OPET.
