Synthes location STRATEC medical is active in the fast-growing market of medical technology. Statically determined capacity requirements values predict bottlenecks in production. For the future, a further strong growth is predicted by experts. The forecast values from SAP can be converted only static on the existing resources in the existing system. To create a simulation model for dynamic capacity requirements planning and optimizing existing and yet-to-be procured resources. The simulation model should be supplemented with a simple communication interface based on MS-Excel, with the aim to provide a simple tool various decision makers of dynamic decision making available. To take into account is the different needs of the decision makers (manufacturing point of view, market vision, etc.). Objectives using simulation to be interpreted the material flow, the production capacity and the buffer optimally. The relationship between quantity and necessary capacity is identified and quantified. An optimal scheduling of the capacity procurement is so supported. The model designed to meet the different requirements of the market and production point of view. The following goals are achievable depending on the quantity structure in detail: - determine the effects of different production strategies on the utilization of plants, the buffer and staff - optimal sizing of buffers in the material flow and production facilities - optimal design of production lines, taking into account irregular production times - see on bottlenecks in the flow of material and development of measures to remove them - requirements for the camp - interpretation and/or optimization of production lines and organization of production. For the evaluation of the system be used following targets: - load the buffer during the simulation period - utilization of employees - load of plants in the material flow - necessary buffer and storage dimensions -... As core functions of the simulation tool to assist the following analyses: - requirements consist of market and production - capacity requirements consist of market and production - dimensioning of buffers and warehouses - resources - resource leveling requirements - what-if analysis - visualization - dynamic determination of disposition parameters the system load data, parameters and targets via Excel the Simulator passed.
