: 01.06.2009 partners / project partner (s): COST Action of IS0703 expectations of text genres used in knowledge communication and academic teaching vary greatly among members of different disciplines and of different linguistic and cultural regions. Genres, defined as typified rhetorical practices in defined settings, help members of knowledge communities to structure knowledge and communicate effectively. Students confronted with the task of writing the genre of another culture usually find it difficoult to meet the expectations of the host culture. In spite of its importance, research on the intercultural differences in genre use is scarce, even within the national educational system such as that of Switzerland. In this project, we want to compare the genre genre practices between universities of different cultures, among them universities of the German, French and Italian-speaking parts of Switzerland. The following issues will be focused on: which text genres are used? How are they are defined? How are integrated they learning in academic? How they are connected to writing practices? We will therefore investigate how genre skills are taught, how they are valued by the facuty Member, and how their place in the included curricula is defined. The project is connected COST Action IS0703 "the European research network of learning to write effectively". The scientific disciplines, but also the language and cultural spaces have designed each their own ideas, what text genres to science communication and higher education are. The genre itself, as well as the genre skills needed to produce depend on despite globalization greatly by discipline, language and cultural area. The trenches between the cultures are obvious and hamper academic mobility. The project compares the practice of scientific writing in the studies at universities of different cultural spaces, including the German, French and Italian Switzerland: What genres are realized how and for what purpose? How will the appropriate genre competence gives and honours in education and science operation? What is so successful scientific writing in the culture? The question of comparability, which is used to develop a parent reference point from which the variety of genres, writing practices, text production skills, learning situations and transfer problems are kontrastierbar is used as a starting point. The analysis will show which challenges students and young scientists are facing, if they show up mobile and go into another writing culture. But also, it should be visible which income arises from writing in a different culture. The project is in the COST Action IS0703 "the European research network of learning to write effectively" connected.
