Sensitivity in dealing with social problems is the public safety the social laboratory in Winterthur, hardly anyone in Winterthur knows the story around the bandstand, where - as we all know - was played hardly ever this music for the handsome building was provided. For many years marginalized people from of alcoholics - alcoholics scene had stayed next door on the semicircular bench under the protective roof. It was their social meeting point, often the home. I myself am here grew up and connected with this city, Winterthur. When I had guests, Winterthur didn't know or were even from far abroad to visit, I showed them also the bandstand. As a former politician, by professional social pedagogue and later teacher at our school of social work, I explained to them the situation not without pride, convinced an evolve grown model to present here, that although irritation triggered, with the surrounding area - shops, passers-by, authorities - but largely arranged. Already for a long time, it presented itself differently. Escalated the situation around the Pavilion. The increasing diffusion of the scene with people who use other drugs, and the corresponding drug deal led to temporarily untenable, also illegal conditions. After a small established medium-sized, open drug scene with attraction northward to southern Germany and far into the Eastern Switzerland. The events at the music Pavilion became a public nuisance to the oft-cited blot of this city. Happen that social issues throughout Switzerland are discredited. In this environment, the pressure on the authorities of the city, to clean up the situation at the bandstand, has grown enormously. Concepts were in demand, but not easy to invent. It took. In this situation into, we decided in consultation with the municipal authorities, that the first social-lab location should be within the framework of our school centenary Winterthur and we would post us here at the focal point of Bandstand. Later joined the City Council to the public and presented the strategy and project mercury. The accompanying measures are known. As one of which were for months in the whole day usage here locally since 1 April 2008 by the yellow container from police patrols. Suddenly, the scene had changed. The increased police presence has reached almost while an important goal: the drug deal is distributed and plays newly decentralized ab, also in private rooms, just as we from Zurich already met it. That the appeal and thus the supra-regional attraction of drug trafficking as a result have plummeted, was the goal and is a success. But where have the outcasts warped? The once traditional scene of excessive alcohol consuming has a few meters next door at stark Park already approaching. And the urban focal point reported significantly higher frequencies. We had adjusted the week of social laboratory to the changed circumstances. Our programme included events on the topic of music Pavilion and whose prospects remain. In collaboration with many local specialists we invited in addition current aspects of social issues and public security to Exchange also on other. This along one of the education focal points for our school to represent confidence in the firm intention, social work, their methods, aims and effects and to make it better known. Monday, June 16 to Saturday 21 June 2008 following events took place under the title social hotspots and public security in the social laboratory to the Winterthur music Pavilion: - explorations carried out by students - self test for conflict and criminal behavior - city walk along social focal points - laboratory talk: focal point music Pavilion - review of 2 1/2 months increased police presence, views of new forms of intervention and action - security training for children - laboratory talk about domestic violence: Public safety begins in your own four walls - use conflicts in the City Park of Winterthur - laboratory talk: hooliganism and fan culture - social work in sports - dangerous situations in the public space - what to do? -Laboratory talk: youth violence - political discussion with the City Council: music Pavilion - like next? Who is fit and on the sunny side of life, has to be solidarity with the weaker! So, social tensions could prevent and remove. To increase this insight, we consider standing, elegant and smart task of each community. Back to the title: sensitivity in dealing with social problems is the public safety. (Excerpt of text media orientation 16.6.2008, post graciously Schildknecht - later adapted) A short report findings from our anniversary social lab project week 16-21 June 2008 in Winterthur, Switzerland on the theme of the outcasts, Bandstand Winterthur, posted by graciously Schildknecht, was dated July 3, 2008 at the city of Winterthur, line project mercury. Followed by more social laboratory sites and topics:-train station Zurich-Affoltern (6-13 Sept 2008): new and old, living together in Zurich-Affoltern (line: Edi Martin)-Center Island Court of Zurich (19.   Sept. 20, 2008): when parents need help (line: Kitty Cassée Barbara Los Schneider)-sea of la vie, Horgen (23-26 Sep 2008): adult in Horgen (line: Georges Köpfli)-townhouse Uster (29 Sept. 3 Oct. 2008): be older in the young Uster (line: Ruth Gurny) direction anniversary project social laboratory: URS Frey, Hanspeter Hongler, Martin Widmer. End of the project: The social laboratory project was evaluated by the Ludwik Fleck Center of the Collegium Helveticum (University and ETH Zurich). Rainer Egloff and Johannes Fehr's report it was graduated at the beginning of December 2008.
