EPI clinic Zurich project completed. Epilepsy places high demands on individuals and their families in dealing with the disease. The Swiss Epilepsy Center examines the necessary advice needs of patients and caregivers with the aim, to optimize nursing actions together with the Zurich University of applied sciences. Background it is estimated that about 4.5 to 7 persons with the disease live in the Switzerland on 1000 inhabitants epilepsy. The patients and their families are encouraged, if it comes with the symptoms of this chronic disease, to bypass the requirements of therapy and its effects on daily life. Those affected need self care and self management skills for dealing with epilepsy and are often assisted by relatives in the daily management. With the Swiss Epilepsy Center in Zurich, a specialized institution for the diagnosis, treatment and care available is the patient. An important activity of the nurses is in the advice and support of epilepsy patients and their caregivers. Feedback showed victims but that this offer is often flawed. Specific assessment tools, which collect information about any burdens, about the functioning of family systems and the individual support needs of those affected and their families exist yet. The goal it self management skills, support needs and quality of life of adult patients with epilepsy and their family/caregivers gathered to develop targeted patient - and family-centered nursing offers in the interdisciplinary care system. In the project the current status of nursing care and support services are at the same time systematically examined and developed a forward-looking approach to the Nursing Advisory. In conducting quantitative and qualitative research methods are applied. Surveys by questionnaire as open interviews are carried out by three employees with in-depth expertise in the field of epilepsy. Significance the study examines whether "prototypical" groups to distinguish familial systems are, which allow you to customize the services and for more efficient and more effective. As a consequence could concepts are developed for the patient and family training and consulting, which ensure the quality of life, support the self care skills of adult patients with epilepsy and their families. The results might be valuable for other institutions, which want to involve in the long-term management of this chronic disease epilepsy patients and their families.
