There is a growing demand for starting position for knowledge about the specific health needs of people with chronic diseases and disabilities. This is urgent, especially for two reasons: (1) the cost pressure and the associated increasing commercialization of health care; (2) the dominance of an acute medical viewing and action particularly in the hospital sector that includes the concern whether people with a disability in the case of a serious health problem receive an adequate treatment and care in the hospital. Objective in the Centre of this investigation given by the Foundation of cerebral in order are severely disabled with additional acute illness, which makes necessary a hospital admission. Goal is to collect and display specific troubleshooting scenarios in the target group with views of positive and critical aspects of the hospitalisation. Method acute medical care of persons with disabilities is scientifically still poorly edited. This allows hardly the formulation of specific research hypotheses. The target population is also not easily accessible, and the survey of health problems requires considerable finger tip feeling and experience on the part of the researchers. For this situation we recommend methods from the field of qualitative social research. The event of hospitalisation to be lit from different perspectives: a) the perspective of the relatives (parents, partner), b) the perspective of the (Professional) reference person from the supervising institution, c) the perspective of the disabled person himself (as far as possible). Due to the different analysis perspectives should be worn together the necessary information from various sources. These include: the analysis of documents (KGs, patient testimonials, inhabitants of dossiers of the supervising institution) and problem-centred interviews with the subjects, families and the caregivers in the institution. Results first results are expected in December 2006. A research report will be published in early summer 2007
