One of the largest and at the same time rare orchid species of Switzerland is municipalities Niederhelfenschwil, Zuckenriet and Lenggenwil the local lady's Slipper. It is the only native Cypripedium species in Europe and in its entire area of distribution (Spain to Japan) endangered and therefore protected. Its typical Habitat (light Föhren-spruce or beech) continues to be through intensification of agriculture, overbuilding or encroachment in constant decline. The Cypripedium calceolus as vulnerable is classified in the Mittelland(Zuckenriet) as endangered on the red list, (Moser et al., 2002). There is therefore great efforts to reduce the decline of this species, and to protect their habitats. This, it is also tried to strengthen existing populations, or to reintroduce former populations. The proliferation of this kind proves difficult and tedious. The development of Cypripediums seeds up to a flowering plant is between 8 and 10 years. The Zurich University in Wädenswil dealing for years with the propagation of Cypripedium calceolus and other endemic orchid species. She works on the preservation of endangered plants and specifically uses the propagated plants in settlement or recovery settlement projects. The Schlipf in Zuckenriet is a former Cypripedium calceolus - Habitat. On the one hand, Mr Bruno Giger, who noticed the women's shoes as a child with his father confirms this. On the other hand, the last existing Cypripedium plant on the edge of the forest bears witness of their existence. Other species of orchids, which are also partly on the "red list of endangered plants of Switzerland" can be found in the 3 parcels area. The plots "In the Schlipf" and "Forest of purple orchis" are currently in an advanced forest succession and are clearly with spontaneous vegetation, especially ash (Fraxinus excelsior) and grown to types of Maple (Acer sp.). From the plant-sociological perspective of orchid species are to describe the lighting conditions in the two plots as dark. Project objectives the area exist Schlipf and the edge of the forest "Purple orchis" and the "Forest hyacinth" again as stable Orchid habitats of woodland. • The local occurrence is necessary the individual number of the woman shoe (Cypripedium calceolus) German ICH be increased. • Lots "In the Schlipf", and "Edge of forest, purple orchis" should be thinned heavily. • The existing Cypripedium companion trees such as pine (Pinus SP.) and beech (Fagus sylvatica) should be encouraged. • The vegetation should be exempted from invasive and disruptive, ground-covering plants such as E.g. the BlackBerry (Rubus SP.) and Clematis (CLematis sp.). The results and the fact-based measures of the vitro - promotion project of this orchid species in situ - and are intended for other types of promotion projects of this complex interacting family of plants.
