Cantonal monument preservation Zurich the internal compression of urban districts and housing estates of the post-war period (CA. 1945-1970) is the historic preservation before new challenges. Besides the buildings themselves, there are especially the urban systems, space systems, and development concepts, which graphically represent the ways of life and the idea of good of this time. These structures are threatening in many places due to uncoordinated compaction and renewal operations gradually to be overwritten. With the refurbishment and assessment first exemplary practices of a summarization of settlements of the post-war period, the research project creates important foundations for future dealing with settlements and quarters of the post-war period. Many of these districts and settlements are valuable witnesses of time typical, urban dispositions, development systems and space concepts. An isolated individual buildings protected status does not do justice to this situation. The essential characteristics of the original facilities were no longer understandable on the basis of some, removed from the settlement of whole objects. Thus, the ways of life and the characteristic, urban - architectural conceptions of time would be no longer comprehensible. Where all settlements or quarters integral can be placed under protection, of course the associated clearance and development systems can receive. In many cases, this approach fails however to the trade-off with a politically broad-based desire to the compaction of well developed residential areas. Often adjustments of construction - zone orders have been made already, so that a consolidation would be legally permissible and increasing the pressure for partial or complete replacement of settlements or entire neighbourhoods. Neighbourhoods and housing estates from the post-war period represent a special challenge therefore in respect to the monument. The historical effect-oriented work on and review exemplary examples should be accompanied by answering parent questions:-conservation strategies are conceivable in relation to dealing with post-war settlements and neighbourhoods which focus in addition to the physical buildings getting on the spatial structure as an important bearer? (Topping or replacement of buildings, maintaining spatial structural qualities) - are compression strategies possible and useful for accommodation - and settlement structures of the postwar, where although a compaction is carried out, the original substance remains however wholly or partially preserved and further developed the urban system, the free-space system and the functioning of the buildings in based closely on the original disposition? (Supplementary buildings) - with what planning and legal instruments worked in the implementation of the exemplary case studies? -What planning and legal instruments would be suitable for an implementation of such transformation processes in neighbourhoods and settlements from the post-war period in the Switzerland?
