Qualified professionals in the areas of science, mathematics and technology (NMT) are essential for innovation and economic growth. In addition to the lack of young emerging for years in the Switzerland, innovative and modern businesses increasingly recognise increasing their attractiveness for qualified Bachelor graduates and university graduates, if they give women and men the same opportunities and committed policy operate a sustainable development. The best trained engineers and engineers to be able to recruit and retain, the enterprises must develop today a corporate culture that is sustainable, attractive, gender - and diversitygerechte. In particular to attract well-educated women, it is becoming increasingly important to initiate action to change and improve the operating structures and the work climate. Because successful careers depend on women and technology to a large extent by the corresponding institutional and organisational framework conditions in the plants. This research project aims to make a contribution to the question how Swiss technical companies can develop their corporate culture gender - and diversitygerecht. It focused the project on technical sciences graduates and their entry into professional life. On the one hand, the expectations of the professional newcomers to the world of work study it and on the other hand, the competence requirements of companies in the graduates raised. Both sides are juxtaposed. To proceed: through interviews the professional conversion examines graduates from various technical courses of the Zurich University of applied sciences (ZHAW). At the same time the corporate culture and gender equality policies or the visions collected in an analysis on this topic of the two internationally active Swiss companies IBM Switzerland and Feller AG. This describes the situation concerning Genderkultur in the Organization and design of work items. By contrasting the views of graduates and companies Department prepared together with the established Advisory - recommendations for the operations for equality of woman and man of the canton of Zurich and Office, family and gainful employment for men and women - and in a transfer event in the Technopark Winterthur in the fall of 2010 presents a wide audience of business and society. The results will also be published in a scientific publication. The project lasts from October 2009 until end of November 2010 and stands under the sponsorship of the Board of the school of engineering at ZHAW. It is financed by the Federal Office for professional education and technology OPET.
