: November 23, 2009 further information / further information: lang = en summary: In this study for the attention of the Federal Agency for health qualitative interviews were conducted with professionals from physicians and care as well as midwives, mothers and lactation consultants regarding their views of the week-bed care. Following points out have crystallized: multimedia professionals care and counselling for pregnant the care, support and advice in the puerperium is in the Switzerland of the professional group of midwives, nursing professionals, lactation consultants, mother consultants and doctors perceived. Within the framework of the inpatient care especially care professionals and lactation consultants have midwives, lactation consultants and advisors of the mother, in ambulatory care. Provision about the qualitative evaluation of the supply offer from the perspective of professional experts revealed that evaluates the current provision as a whole as well. The benefits under the compulsory health care insurance are manifold, provided by highly qualified health personnel and can be taken by women up to the end of the week bed avail. This positive assessment is restricted fragmented range without personnel continuity due to the finding that the provision is fragmented and a continuity of care of women and their families is hardly possible. In certain regions of Switzerland is a lack of free practicing midwives in addition so that it comes to the part to supply gaps after being discharged from the hospitals. In addition potential of health promotion and prevention not sufficiently used from the perspective of experts and experts and lacks specific supply offerings for women in difficult social situations. Need for action with regard to the introduction of performance-related pay as a whole suggest the results suggest that provision in regard to social change and the resulting changed requirements should be further developed. The introduction of performance-related pay is expected to lead to a further shift of the week bed care in the ambulatory sector. A politically-driven, proactive development of new supply concepts and structures, as well as the securing of human resources would be required. In addition to experts and expert interviews, also data surveys of providers were evaluated in the week bed time. The following image shows: evaluation of demand: little empirically secure knowledge there are a number of data surveys on services of various actors in the postpartum period, which could be used for a detailed analysis. What is however largely missing, is considering the demand side. In addition, the various databases can only compare, but not link. A continuous data collection would be desirable to be able to extract information about the change over time. This would allow to adapt the offers based on empirical findings to the changed framework conditions. Advice in dealing with the new situation the evaluation of the available data showed that the vast majority of the assisted women looking for advice in dealing with the new situation. Central questions about breastfeeding are respectively to the diet and to the care of the child. In the first ten days after the birth, medical indications about when present mother and/or child, giving rise to a support. Were the wound healing in the mothers and the children a hyperbilirubinemia the most frequent reasons. Midwives as well as parent advisors are also wanted on psycho social problems.
