On behalf of the Office for youth and vocational training, the Hochschhule of social work of Zurich (HSSAZ) carries out a consultation with the secretariats of all youth and school care in the canton of Zurich. General objective of the job of school social work in the canton of Zurich is to develop principles for the management and coordination of school social work (SSA) in the canton of Zurich of the Office for youth and vocational guidance (AJB). Within the framework of the order module A, the HSSAZ has produced a report which documented the current problems of development of school social work, and on the other hand, describes the different performance profiles of school social work. In the job module B now cantonal control objectives and coordination with regard to the school of social work will be engrossed clarified and concretised in the form of proposals by surveys at the school care and youth Secretaries. The survey in the school care to clarify how to perceive the extremely disparate developments of school social work by the school maintain and what coordination measures expect the school care about school social work by the canton or which support requests are. Further will be how the planning projects collected in 2003/2004 have evolved and what planning intentions for the next years are investigated, (review of development forecasts by 2004 and clarification for the years 2006-2008). In particular this survey to clarify regarding the preferences of the school maintain sponsorship forms and performance profiles. Objective of the survey of the youth offices is to investigate how this youth welfare institutions assess the development of school social work in their region and which cantonal coordination measures and forms of support are necessary or priority from this perspective. In this context especially the current forms of cooperation between youth and school social work should be clarified in detail, but also the already observable impact of the many new school social work posts on the labour situation in the secretariats of the youth and the already foreseeable consequences on the planned welfare reform. The project was completed in April 2006.
