In the Switzerland, enormous changes have occurred in the education of health professionals in recent years. This took place a diversification of accounts on different levels of education especially in the field of nursing, in which mainly women are employed. These new professions is a three-year teaching in secondary education with the capability card as expert health ("Assistante en soins et santé communautaire" ASSC or "qualified persons health" FAGE) completes. The special situation that brings in the care team with the integration of a new profession, which originally was not designed as a help profession for care, has not been studied. Empirical studies that can identify factors for a smooth cooperation, are necessary to meet the retention of women in the profession so that proactive measures to improve teamwork and collaboration in the care team can be taken to the looming nursing shortage and the short. The SUPSI Manno, the Zurich University of applied sciences Zurich Winterthur, the HES-SO Lausanne have developed a study proposal in cooperation with the Swiss Association of nurse and care professional, should explore factors for a friction-poor cooperation and describe models of cooperation. The objectives of the study are:-to examine what concepts for the introduction of these new professionals in the care team in institutions of the Swiss health system exist. -different models of cooperation and their consequences in clinical practice to describe also with regard to the equality or inequality between men and women. -to identify smooth cooperation in clinical practice and in direct patient care. Design an exploratory, descriptive an observer design will be applied to the three linguistic regions of Switzerland. For conducting the study, the Zurich University of applied sciences, Department of work Health Institute, Winterthur; the University of the West of Switzerland, HES-SO, HEdS, la source Lausanne, and the Südschweizeri-University of applied sciences, SUPSI together.
