The E-learning platform of tools and building materials for the course of facility management was completed and supplemented with interactive tasks and issues. Since April 2010 wood, glass, natural stone, concrete and artificial stone, ceramic, metal, plastics, full and semi-synthetic are students eBooks on the subjects of fibers cotton, rope, silk, and wool available. Thanks to the interactive form of learning students are given the opportunity to supplement their knowledge and to deepen further according to your interests. The content is largely due to the focus of the facility manager, aligned with the facility manager. The entire life cycle of the materials is in the focus. The eBooks give information about the manufacture and use of different materials, and properties and areas of use, cleaning, and sustainability. Geared the students in the ItkA can!, solve the interactive task tool, questions and review their own learning progress immediately. Responsibility E-learning materials: anja.fuchs@zhaw.ch Bapoly means basic principles of Oecotrophology and is a joint project of Zurich and the University of Zurich. The project was launched in 2001 with the aim to develop a modern and interactive learning platform for schools. E-learning is a part of the project Bapoly materials. Another part of project by Baboly E-learning is diet, which is currently created and will from autumn 2010. The module to a health contribution in the field of nutrition and health and empower target groups to assume responsibility as well as foundations, which allow the design of a healthy diet offer for community catering for their diet. Responsibility E-learning nutrition: claudia.schuetz@zhaw.ch the interactive task tool ItkA! used in both projects. The concept comes from Dr. Wolfgang Sahoo. ItkA! is an interactive software that supports task - and problem-based learning. Students should be encouraged through this learning software to the independent acquisition of knowledge. Tasks and questions are categorized according to the taxonomy of Benjamin Bloom divided into different learning levels. In the free practice area students can independently decide what topics on which taxonomy level are exercised. The tasks are based on the selection criteria by random system from a database put together by and played to the learner. Lecturers can compose tests for certain chapters and learning levels. While editing a test the learner will be informed constantly about the current level of performance. At the end of each test block the learner receives an evaluation of the achieved performance, as well as the course average. The so-called "battle of knowledge" is a playful variation between training and test. Case studies available are for the acquisition of knowledge at the highest level of learning (synthesis, evaluation). Case studies have a game character; a distinction is made between the gold-oriented case study (collection of gold crowns) and goal-oriented case study. When gold coins, gold coins can be collected by the correct answer. The goal-oriented question is more complex, comprehensive responses are developed. ItkA! is an empty vessel that can be filled with any content in different modules. The usage is especially efficient when several project partners each jointly develop a module and use. Currently, three task modules are developed: materials, food, and household appliances. ItkA responsibility! and coordination Bapoly: claudia.schmucki@zhaw.ch
