Spr端ngli Kilchberg, Germany, Italia company Lindt Spr端ngli AG produces top quality products in the field of chocolate products. The implementation of traceability requirements requires a review of tank storage capacity in the area of the intermediate and storage tanks for chocolate mass. The design and dimensioning of the planned system are not calculable by traditional means of planning. The required number of components that are performance requirements for the material management systems, the influence of the structure of the last data on the performance of the overall system, as well as the effects of various confounding factors can be statically determined. The planned system will be therefore dynamically investigated and judged in a simulation study. Based on the load data provided by Lindt Spr端ngli AG a productive week in the past, should be whether the existing tank situation for the management meets the new challenge, or how many tanks have to be obtained in addition clarified through a simulation. In a simulation model, the concept of the current storage tank system represented by the IAS and dynamically examines the behavior. The simulation is to determine whether the existing tanks in the area dark and light mass sufficient to secure for the batch traceability essential "Before filling the tank, if completely empty". If the existing storage and holding capacities are not sufficient, the simulation should determine the number and the dimensions of the tanks to be procured in the field of intermediate tanks and storage tanks. Are to achieve the following objectives:-assessment of the current situation of the tank (number of tanks) with regard to traceability - optimal number of tanks to deal with strong production days for the evaluation of the system following targets be used: - processed quantity per unit of time - allocation of tanks during the simulation period - under break times in the areas of Conching and forms due to insufficient tank capacity the approach in this simulation studies for total three production sites by Lindt Spr端ngli in Switzerland and abroad applied.
