Due to the rising demand for care and support services, decreasing familial resources for the service of Member and the increasing desire of old people, to grow old at home, is to assume an increasing demand of domestic care and childcare services in the near future. Already a supply gap is emerging, which is increasingly filled by care migrants so-called live-in arrangements. Migrants live for a certain time in the care and take over household chores, caring responsibilities and partly also nursing tasks. Despite increasing media coverage and attention on the part of the science, many questions about the care of the elderly by care migrants remain unclear. Especially regarding the quality/safety of services and optimal service delivery, such as for example the needs of assisted households, are not sufficiently investigated. So little is known about the experiences of families whose motives this offer to access, the effects of the care situation on the family system and the person as an individual swarms. Families by disease or infirmity are concerned, they must to reorganize and find ways to cope with the situation and changes. Our study assumes that the hiring of a care of migrant in one live - arrangement affect a) the family system of the person concerned, as well as b) has on the supervised person as an individual. The arrival of a foreign person in the household is often associated with language barriers and requires a large adjustment performance of all those involved. Distance and proximity and the assumption of roles and responsibilities need to be renegotiated. It can depend on tackling this adjustment performance, whether the hiring of a care immigrant as a relief for the family or even a burden is felt. Objective: Goal is to investigate the phenomenon of the ambulatory 24-hour care by households from the perspective of the old people concerned and their families. A special focus is set in on the impact of the live arrangements on the family system. Method: Is a cross sectional study in which both qualitative and quantitative methods are used. This triangulation allows to draw a more complete picture of the subject of the research, with however the focus clearly on the qualitative content of the method it 50 qualitative inter-views should be done with 25 families (relatives to caring person). Both demographic and health-related data, such as scale raised the frailty index and the NOSGER are the description of the participants and their health situation. The qualitative analysis of the interviews after Strauss Corbin and C. Charmaz uses techniques of grounded theory. The quantitative data are evaluated using descriptive statistics and bivariate correlations.
