Location facility management as an industry and as a profession continues to be a relatively new concept label with numerous design possibilities in many continental European countries. The market potential and the added value of the facility management can be opened up only comprehensively, if potential customers and users management know the term facility and, what is behind it. In addition to the awareness and the understanding of facility management, the image aspect of the industry is a key success factor to achieve entrepreneurial goals. Efforts to increase the awareness and the images are already in the form of current public campaigns and others in Germany and of Switzerland to observe. However, reliable and representative tests are available, the notoriety nor the image of the FM industry. Task, approach and results based on these findings, a representative population survey to determine of the reputation and image of the FM industry in the Switzerland was designed and conducted. The investigation conducted as time-related country studies, aimed at the image categories of international EPSI studies (European performance satisfaction index) is inspired by, should one provide in the future also in other countries in the 1-2-year repeat a comparison. The FM image index can thus form an image benchmarks perform country comparisons as well as company comparisons. There were Switzerland (German - and French-speaking) questioned a total of 2,100 randomly selected people aged between 15 and 75 years on the subject. There were questions including awareness and understanding of the FM, future assessment of the industry and general industry renown on the subjects. A quantitative telephone survey (CATI) with open and closed questions was chosen for the survey. The results show a very differentiated picture and allow an interesting insight into the different understanding of facility management in the Switzerland. Only a fraction of the Swiss population has a realistic idea of the concept of FM. By the additional collection of selected socio-demographic characteristics of respondents (age, gender, employment, education, household income, etc.) can produce interesting cross-references to the reputation and image of the facility management and allow as an insightful analysis of the results. Relevance / degree of innovation the first representative population survey of its kind in the Switzerland provides an interesting insight into the public understanding of the economically important and still growing economic sector. In addition, this study will form the pilot survey to a cross-national longitudinal study and thus a country and individual company benchmarking to the image of the facility management field.
