Saffron samples from the Switzerland, Austria, Spain, Iran and Greece on their sensory properties were investigated in this project. The aim was to characterize the Swiss Graubünden saffron sensory and to compare with other samples of Saffron. The aroma of Saffron is made especially during the drying process and each country and each region has their own method. For this reason, the organoleptic characteristics between saffron samples of various origins vary. There are two different drying types which are applied. The scars at room temperature with heat from the Sun or in ventilated rooms are dried in India, Morocco and the Iran. In Italy, Greece and Spain, the scars are dried, however, at higher temperatures with hot air, heaters or charcoal. Saffron samples were analyzed by the objective technical panel of the ZHAW. The Panel was coached in six training sessions. The appropriate matrix for the tasting of Saffron was determined by preliminary tests. Saffron was ultimately pur to smelling, in water and in rice. In practice, the Panel initially generated the attributes and formulated the corresponding definitions. The Panel has been trained using reference materials and pairwise comparisons. Then a classic profile was conducted at the training. The reviews were by means of a variance analysis, subsequent post-hoc tests (Fisher LSD test) and principal component analysis evaluated. The level of significance was 95% here. The results showed that the Greek and Spanish saffron have the most pronounced sensory properties. Swiss saffron was rated the weakest in almost all attributes. The Iranian and Austrian saffron are classified in terms of sensory characteristics between the Spanish samples and the Swiss saffron. The drying process could play a decisive role for the more intense manifestations at the Greek and Spanish saffron. Scars, which are dried at temperatures between 50 ° and 83 ° C for less than 60 minutes, exhibit higher Picrocrocin and Safranalwerte as scars, which are dried at low temperatures over a long period (24 hours). The Saffron flavor is based on over 50 compounds, where all saffron specimens that are always the same main verb in things. Due to the Dominaz of this main verb in things, it could be difficult to detect the slight sensory differences.
