ERO Gerätebau GmbH, D-Niederkumbd; Westfalia Separator Food Tec, D-Oelde. Ministry of economy, D-Mainz; Service Centre, D-Bad Kreuznach; Research Institute, D-Geisenheim wine-making system analysis gives the factor time as critical size. Optimal conditions and periods - unless they are influenced – must be created for the various oenological processes in regard to the desired end-product quality. During the period, some wine risks lie between harvest and incipient fermentation. Uncontrolled enzyme activities, the proliferation of undesirable microorganisms, as well as the extraction and implementation by constituents of leaves, leaf stalks and the stalk structure affect the quality of the final product. Objective the development of a grape harvest juicer is the shorter of process times during the grape harvest and grape processing to reduce adverse effects and to realize economic benefits through the direct whereabouts of pomace and Lees components in the vineyard. To achieve these objectives, a powerful, continuous juicing system had to be found initially with a targeted extraction of determines the worth of ingredients is possible. Through the findings collected at the specialty beverage of the Hochschule Wädenswil in cooperation with various companies in the beverage industry since 1999 the suitability could be determined in the wine and juice, by horizontal centrifuge (decanter) for this range. In addition, a powerful grape harvesting system with integrated stalk Remover-pressing device had to be found and convinced both manufacturers of the vision of the synthesis of two functioning systems. After first attempts with a mobile horizontal centrifuge at the edge of the box in 2002 on the Moselle was started the following year with the development. Attempts are performed in cooperation with the rural service centre Rhenish Hesse near Hunsrück, Bad Kreuznach. The area of expertise of wine analysis and beverage research of the Forschungsanstalt Geisenheim assumes the poly phenol analysis within the project. The following study design was elected to the evaluation of the new development, using the Müller-Thurgau, Silvaner and Riesling grapes: - hand-picked with whole grape pressing - hand-picked with mash pressure - harvesters with mash pressure - grape harvest juicer the sample points were fixed as follows: - most after phase separation - most after degumming - young wine after fermentation - wine after bottling - wine after 6 months of bottle - wine after 12 months of bottle to these sample points is in addition to the sensory analysis an examination of the essential wine chemical parameters as well as the relevant polyphenols and flavourings. First results show that the completed juice yields and the resulting young wine qualities showed no negative deviations for the system of the grape harvest juicer comparison variants to be tested. The measured Gesamtpolyphenolgehalte are the variant of the grape harvest juicer about 10% above those of the comparison options. Concentrations, be achieved E.g. with maceration times over 2-4 h, were undercut. Sensory no negative influence of higher extraction could be determined at the previously conducted Jungweindegustationen. The turbidity which by means of Decanter technology gained musts depending on the grape variety of the maturity and the State of health clearly from the comparison options differs. The spin trub concentration (gross Lees) is much less than 1% (v/v) in most cases. Healthy raw material of Müller-Thurgau grape achieved turbidity values in field trials in Rhenish Hesse, no further correction is required prior to fermentation. The concentration of colloidal trub (fine Lees) is especially for material closed enzymatically by micro-organisms on the berries with values 1000 NTU (Nephelometric turbidity units) increased significantly. The fine Lees contains value defining ingredients from the region of the grape skin. Although the gross Lees remains primarily with the grape in the vineyard, it requires a correction of the fine Lees concentration. To use the transport time to the enzyme reaction, a continuous dosing system will be developed for the application of treatment resources on the grape harvest juicer. The investigation in March 2006 in Chile the harvesting and juicing performance was further optimized. So a performance was achieved at the beginning of the harvest at the grape variety Chardonnay with the testing machine of up to 5.5 t / h. Also the above charging was realized, with the extracted juice on the parallel line guided tank trailer is transferred. In the night usage with the grape variety Sauvignon blanc, the engine produced cider with a temperature of about 12 ° C and the associated benefits for the Primäraromatik. Strain-dependent micro bubble phenomena were observed with up to 20% (v/v) foaming. The foam should be reduced in the future through the modification of product leadership in the decanter. Petiole concentration associated with the senescence of leaves in the crop emerged as a problem for the separation efficiency of the decanter. To solve this problem, a distance of the petiole is developed and provided for the test program in the fall of 2006 in Germany. After modification of different structural characteristics the system could be tested (up to 90% of Botrytis cinerea) in the autumn of 2006 in Rheinland-Pfalz and Rheingau under extreme conditions regarding the rot infestation. During these tests, achieved speeds of up to 4.5 km/h and the decanter of up to 7 t / h feed services. As there is in consequence of the hydrodynamic extraction of berries turn the skins from the outside inwards and their enhanced extraction, higher amounts of Botrytis cinerea metabolites in the juice led to issues of clarification of. An increased extraction of glucans will negatively affect the Filterability of young wines. Accordingly, a customized cloud management using appropriate enzymes is essential. Modified series components from the two manufacturers form the basis of the testing machine (11 tonnes unladen weight). After completing the first testing phase (2005-2006), the weight reduction in the redesign in 2007 represents a central target size. In cooperation with the Chair of the Forschungsanstalt Geisenheim is technology equipment a GPS, which makes it possible to collect vineyard land-related data and process. This data can be used in the proof of origin and the control of weinbaulicher measures. Economic quantities are verified in collaboration with the Chair of business administration of the Forschungsanstalt Geisenheim. In principle can be stated that combining machine works and after further testing and redesign the project objectives the chances for a successful use of the system can be assessed positively.
