Partner institution: Zürcher Hochschule der Künste project \ entry: Kommunikationsstrategien\\\ is as a successor project of DVD produced at the ZHAW \ viewpoint - women in technical and economic Ausbildungen\\\ (some Spörri, Bolli Schaffner, Heimberg, 2007) launched. It was a semi-documentary film, in which key situations are cinematically lit for the positioning in the professional life and different communicative coping strategies for the career of University of applied sciences graduates. He supports women in their ambitions to a management position in the operating and deliberate career planning by he stimulates self-reflection and offers assistance to the constructive influence of the own behavior. To make the script as close to reality, interviews were held with women, which can provide information about your experience of entering the professional world after graduating University of applied sciences. A further goal of these talks was to investigate which factors contribute to the retention and advancement of women in the field of technical and economic or interfere with this detail. Also, questionnaires in a quantitative research design broad filed and evaluated, as certain designated by the social science literature and relevant for this topic, arbeitsweltliche factors are carried out by professional newcomers. The film was made in collaboration with the Zurich University of the arts. It was published under: some San Juan, S., Walker, C. Heimberg, L. (2009). Viewpoint: Get started in technical and economic fields. An awareness-raising film with information and material for use in education and training and operations. Lengerich: Pabst Science Publishers. Project completed at 31 December 2009 other publications: some San Juan, S. Walker, C. (2009). Discrimination through the viewfinder: raising awareness for workplace discrimination using film based on online surveys and interviews. Feminist research methods - at international conference of Stockholm University, 2009 electronic paper. Lectures and Conference papers on the project: Some San Juan, S. Walker, C. (2009, February). Discrimination through the view finder: raising awareness for workplace discrimination using film based on online surveys and interviews. Speech on the occasion of the Conference feminist research methods - international conference, Stockholm University, Stockholm. Some San Juan, S. Walker, C. (2009, may). Laissez-faire or laissez-seul? Leadership style and behaviour destructive leader. Speech on the occasion of the 14 th European Congress of work and Organzational Psychology (EAWOP), Santiago de Compostela, Spain. Some San Juan, S. Walker, C. (2009, June). Career entry of young female professionals. Challenges and intervention via use of media. Speech on the occasion of the 7th European Feminist Research Conference, gendered cultures at the crossroads of imagination, knowledge and politics, June 4-7 2009 Utrecht, Netherlands. Some San Juan, Sylvia Walker, Caroline (2009). Participatory video - a method for promoting the transfer of knowledge in the area of gender competence in business and education. Speech at the International Symposium «SciCom09», possibilities and limits of science communication, Technical University of Vienna, 16-17 November 2009.
