taboobreaker GmbH, the start up company of taboobreaker GmbH realized a prototype of an online game for the prevention of sexual assault for use in primary schools. The game is basically aimed at strengthening resources of children: it aims to strengthen their self-esteem and show them coping with problems. Consist of the key prevention messages to encourage the children, to say no to unwanted touching, knowing the own squealing to protect, to show the difference between good and bad secrets, to identify perpetrators strategies and to use incidents to someone familiar to the children, adults or a Department. This prototype in terms of age Justice of content and suitability for use in the school context was investigated in a feasibility study. The project is composed of steps and elements: in a first step a literature study was carried out, representing the international State of knowledge about effective according to school-based programs for the prevention of sexual abuse in children and adolescents. The goal was to determine the key factors identified below in empirical studies as has been proven with the prevention of sexual abuse in children in a context. In a feasibility study in five primary schools (2. classes) tested this prototype to answer two main questions: the content of the online game are age-friendly? Is the online game for use in the school context? Has been tested by means of a personal survey of 53 children, whether the content for the various levels of education as age are, i.e. whether the children have played motivated, they have understood the contents of knowledge presented and how they found attractive the game design. Also, five class teachers for this purpose and for use in the school were interviewed by telephone. Finally he was compared on the one hand, and with a selection of existing online games to the prevention of sexual assault, on the other hand by taboobreaker developed game prototype with the results of the literature study on effective factors, gaps of the game and the need for further development to show and discuss.
