The demand for textile raw materials rises worldwide due to the growing population and the increasing Pro-Kopf-Verbrauches. One assumes today average per capita consumption of 10.8 kg and it expects on the population estimated by the United Nations in the year 2050, the estimated requirements is located on textile raw materials 20 million tonnes higher than they are today. Cotton (BW) and the fact that not only the population but also the per capita consumption will increase in the future, is to assume that demand and hence the need for the BW will be doubled in the year 2050, approximately. In the clothing industry, BW is currently the most important textile raw material, due to its pleasant wear properties this although polyester produced already surpassed it by the production volumes. Because the cultivation of BW on the so-called BW belt is limited, the production can be extend but only slightly and can never cover the increased demand expected. In addition to BW, other vegetable fibers such as flax, hemp, ramie, and nettles are known for your very pleasant wear properties. In addition, hemp has the advantage, that he easily in our latitudes can be mounted, is very disease resistant and provides approximately 4 times yield from organic cotton and the double fibre yield of conventional per ha. Hemp as environmentally friendly alternative and addition to the BW wants to establish future he must become worked up, that its fibers can be delivered cost-effectively and sustainably and to high-quality products processed with modern machinery textile. At the ETH Zurich could be detected, that it is technically feasible to work on hemp in the laboratory-scale that can be spun its fibers on an OE spinning into pure hemp yarns in the range of 50tex. Thus, an important part of goal on the way to the textile use hemp could be achieved. The next step involves at the ZHAW now, to transfer the entire processing chain – from seed to textile process hemp fibre - from the laboratory scale on the industrial scale, to bring the individual process steps when it comes to sustainability on the latest state of technology, as well as to identify the possible costs of production. At the same time it comes also to provide enough fiber material for the production of interesting prototypes and product lines to show up so the market potential and market opportunities of hemp fabrics.
