PrivaSphere AG project description in collaboration between the company PrivaSphere AG and the Institute for applied information technology InIT of the Zurich University of applied sciences (ZHAW) developed the automated security testing framework (ASTF) this KTI project. The motivation for this project was provided by the fact that modern, business-critical online applications have now restrictive security requirements, the support by appropriate automated security testing tools exists but only rudimentary. Consequently, that especially for short release cycles testing of safety-critical components either inadequately or with high personnel costs is carried out. The result is poor software quality or high costs for the manufacturer of the application. The primary goal of this KTI project was the development of a testing framework, with which online applications, largely automated their safety can be tested. This framework should consist in a set of methods and tools, which can be efficiently used for a wide range of safety-critical online applications. ASTF product developed in the framework of the project the above could be achieved project results. ASTF combines a variety of freely available open-source testing tools and allows their largely automated usage under a single user interface. The most important properties of ASTF are briefly described below:-ASTF covers all levels of security testing, which ranges from analysing the source code to testing of safety-critical application processes. It is also possible to formulate tests on various applications across (E.g. interaction between Web and E-Mail) and perform. -ASTF allows you to configure when (E.g. every night at 2:00) which tests are run and what happen in case of failure to (E.g. email). -ASTF offers various graphical and textual analysis options to locate this also quickly discovered problems. With a historicization of the through tests, it also allows ASTF continuously check the security level of a software during the development phase as well as during productive use and to monitor the quality of history. -ASTF is designed specifically so that more testing tools can be integrated easily using a plugin mechanism. Thus, the simple extension of ASTF is given in the future. ASTF is established even daily by PrivaSphere, to continuously test their own secure messaging appli cation and its further development and to verify their quality. Moreover, ASTF is for selected companies in the framework of pilot projects in the field. Already, it reveals that ASTF brings an efficiency gain compared in practical use for manual testing, since effort by far is compensated for the initial to formulate security tests, by the following, clearly reproducible, and automated testing. Related documents: M. Rennhard. Automated software security testing. In IT security, MediaSec AG, issue 4, pages 24-26, December 2008 M. Rennhard. Automated software security testing. Presented at security zone 039; 08, Zurich, Switzerland, 24th September 2008
