Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is the most important cause of severe respiratory infections in infants and young children. An estimated 50% of all newborns are infected within their first year of life with RSV, at worst, the disease can take a lethal course. RSV infections also represent a significant problem among older people. For the treatment of RSV infection, no vaccine exists until today. In the framework of the project, a Virosomen vaccine against RSV will be developed in cooperation with the company Pevion biotech. Currently, RSV infected patients be treated neutralizing antibodies (Synagis) with anti-virals or virus. A prophylactic vaccine could prevent infection with RSV. Pevion biotech developed such a vaccine, based on a membrane protein (rRSV-F) of the virus, which is recombinantly produced and incorporated into Virosomen. Virosomen consist of Lipidvesikeln, in which membrane proteins of influenza virus are embedded, and serve as delivery systems for the production of vaccines against various antigens. RRSV-F is integrated in the Virosomen membrane to the production of the RSV-Virosomen vaccine. This leads to an increased immunogenicity of rRSV F. The rRSV F protein made recombinant using transient expression in mammalian cells (Prof. Dr. F. Wurm, EPFL). Then was purified rRSV-F by means of three chromatography steps in the section Biochemistry at the ZHAW. The trimeric complex transmembrane protein was first solved with a detergent from the cell membranes and grossly purified by ion-exchange chromatography, and concentrated. The two following chromatography steps achieved a purity of 95% in good yield. Extensive screening tests of different detergents and various chromatography materials and conditions were necessary for the development of the cleaning process. In addition, a scalable process had to be developed. Several analytical methods have been used for in-process and quality control. An ELISA was developed for the quantification of rRSV F. The purity and identity of rRSV-F was determined by SDS-PAGE, Western blot, HCP - and DNA analysis. Furthermore, analyses of the Glykosylierungsmuster were made. The purified rRSV-F protein was a Virosomen vaccine formulated by Pevion biotech and experiments used for efficacy in mice. The vaccinated mice produced antibodies that neutralized the RS-virus, which demonstrated the effectiveness of the vaccine. In addition, an upscale and process transfer is planned for production of material for clinical trials in accordance with GMP guidelines.
