Also in the profession of journalist, breaking a readership in the press area, new challenges posed by online media and a rising pressure of economization in times of media change lead University of Neuchâtel to drastic changes. How journalists perceive their profession and working conditions as well as your own role self image should be in the center of this internationally-based project. Background: As part of the long-standing (existing since 2007) international research project by Prof. Dr. Thomas Hanitzsch titled "Worlds of Journalism", in over 80 countries carried out a standardized representative journalist survey. The project is based on the belief that changes in journalism through comparative research can look at and analyze. Only in the comparison and global classification shows trends and culture-specific developments. Not only obvious differences in culturally, politically and socially diverse countries should thus be observed, but also supposedly similar systems can have specific characteristics and tendencies. Therefore, the project as a German cooperation project along with Germany and Austria in the context of "Worlds of Journalism" is embedded. Country-comparative research, the results generated from the survey as time reverse run changes can be with former journalist surveys analyze and put into relationship. Objective: The main objective of the study is to show researchers, journalists as well as media and political actors to change the professional orientation of the journalists and to explain. In both conditions and constraints under which are used as the General functions of journalism have a great significance. For example, the role of journalists is to the most important areas of influence on the career and the entire journalism. It is essential, as their own role as a journalist is perceived, whether we look rather than monitors of policy or as a anwaltschaftlicher actor. It is also interesting to know that journalists feel as independent in the exercise of their activities and how these influence affects the media product.
