Background clinical pathways used in Swiss hospitals mainly to support the documentation of existing processes. In Germany and other countries, however, used increasingly for the measurement of efficiency and effectiveness - and also for ensuring the quality of treatment in a hospital. With the help of these paths can be controlled, how long is the duration of stay of a patient with a particular diagnosis and with the medical purpose designed. In the Switzerland there are days - average 8-9 in Germany only 6.7 days. Where 40% of cases can be displayed about standardised. Today, the clinical paths in the hospitals in most separated cases per Klink, Institute or Department investigated - a holistic view is missing. An integrated path management promises potential for optimisation here. With the help of path management, the paths can be put together individually. The patient goes through the hospital, depending on the diagnosis, based on predefined processes. The paths include changes of responsibilities, structures and processes. Objective of starting point of research in the framework of this KTI project (Swiss Confederation's innovation promotion agency) is the question of how a Swiss "optimally" facing up hospital in the States Organization, processes, structure, management and IT, for the introduction of clinical paths can operate optimally to the hospital with regard to the settlement obligation pursuant to DRG (pauschalisiertes pay system) in 2012 and associated cost pressure, to be able to optimize. As a result of this work, a reference model will be developed to facilitate the implementation of clinical paths for Swiss hospitals on the basis of leadership, support and performance. Objectives and current approach in a first step will be the effect of lump sum payment systems (internationally) recognized and prepared. In this way, one promises to be able to identify evidence of potential for optimization in Swiss hospitals. A Vision 2015 (scenario DRG) should be built on the basis of this evidence, with the question, what will change in the Swiss hospital 2015 is expected to face today. Possible consequences for Swiss hospitals should be derived from this General vision together with Reviewspitälern. Where is answering the questions in the foreground, which issues for Swiss move hospitals in focus and which process topics (internal/external, inter-sectoral) are particularly relevant. Involved partners ZHAW Zurich University of applied sciences: Centre for Business Informatics and Winterthur Institute for health economics; Besa partners AG
