Liquid-handling on Pipettierrobotern is in the in-vitro diagnostic use area (IVD) and widespread use in the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industry. With the use of reusable Pipettiernadeln, you must ensure that no undue delay (Carry-Over) between samples is carried out. So far, there was no established procedure, which allows the determination of the Carry Over of Pipettiernadeln according to a standardized method. As the first target of the project, robust methods were developed in buffer and serum for the exact and reproducible quantification of Carry over with standard Pipettiernadeln. These surfaces were used as analytes Fluorescein and diagnostically relevant Mon leküle representing immunoglobulin G (IgG) and hepatitis B antigen (HBsAg). The standard test procedures established at the ZHAW to quantify the Carry over were successfully implemented liquid handling systems of Hamilton Bonaduz AG, the SIAs AG and Tecan Switzerland AG on the. Another objective was to minimize the Carry over of Pipettiernadeln, so can avoid the cost-intensive use of disposable tips and used reusable needles. The analyte IgG and HBsAg allowable carry defined maximum over values, which Carry Over related false positive samples can be excluded. Showed a high analyte carryover, to previously used Pipettiernadeln and washing routines. Ten new coatings were developed to minimize the Carry over (surface contacts GmbH, Zurich) for this reason. This showed that the required carry over values could not be achieved solely by varying the coating. Decontamination steps were developed and optimized both in terms of time as well as type of solution. Integration of the decontamination routine could be the Carry Over the reduced 10 039; colourised and over values below the maximum carry. Standard test procedures could be established to measure the Carry over successfully. This made it possible to develop new coatings, which were the carry over values are below the required target values for Pipettiernadeln and decontamination steps. The determination of IgG and HBsAg in serum is feasible with reusable Pipettiernadeln without relevant Carry Over and the routines are a high throughput compatible. In addition, the methods developed to measure and to minimize the Carry over with little effort can be transferred to customer-specific substances.
