Slang is a wrought so far still little research in the German Switzerland, also the teaching consequences of a youth language research of German Switzerland are not come more to the fore. The project examines youth language in the German Switzerland from linguistic dialektologischer perspective and provides? prototypical? Descriptions of the language of young people. Sprachdidaktische considerations and materials can build on the base of this description, which follow the competence approach of the common European framework of reference for languages also for mother-tongue competence acquisition (L1 competences): slang is considered part of the spectrum of native or local linguistic competence. Are these fundamentals secondary 2 given the discussion about insufficient linguistic and communicative skills to the Polytechnic students urgently needed to the existing better assess skills, appreciate and integrate in the didactics, and on the other hand the interface? University of applied sciences on requested training profiles to make more concrete. The project focuses on youth language research from dialektologischer point of view, because youth language in the German Switzerland? (almost) entirely in its spoken form, and in parts also in its written form? Dialect is. It takes into account the binnendifferenzierte dialect situation of German Switzerland by the inclusion of four dialect landscapes in Basel, Berne, Nidwalden and Zurich. Comparisons between Nidwalden, Basel, Bern and Zurich show jingoistic constants and socio-cultural as well as economic demographic differences and lay the Foundation for that other problem areas in the field of youth language can build on a linguistic reference system. The youth languages data collection covering orality and writing sets the empirical basis for the description of language and for the description of language competence, which can be used for linguistic and communicative education of youth on the secondary level 2 and in the high education. The project has three short subjects: (1) structural and functional description of the variety of slang (2) representation of the linguistic and communicative skills of young people in the field of tension of dialect language (3) fundamentals for holistic perception of the language of young people and foundations for sprachdidaktische consequences. Project duration: 27 months the survey focused on the? upper age segment? Secondary 2 students and beginners of the Zürcher Hochschule Winterthur. The data is collected, including young experts.
