The EDAQ is a 102 item self-report questionnaire. Items are listed under 11 dimensions of Personal (P-ADL) and Instrumental ADL (I-ADL; 4-13 items in each scale). P-ADL subscales are: eating, transfer, toileting, dressing and bathing/showering. I-ADL subscales are: cooking, indoor mobility, cleaning, washing/clothes care, mobility outdoors/shopping and communication. The original content was developed by asking people with RA and Rheumatology OTs about difficulties commonly experienced. Scoring ranges from 0 for “no difficulty” to 3 for “unable to do”. Ability to perform activities over the last two weeks is considered: a) without assistive devices and /or altered working methods and b) with assistive devices and/or alternate working methods. It does not include productivity (work: paid, unpaid, voluntary; or education) or leisure activities as these are measured with other assessments. 
The UK-EDAQ project Steering Group has undertaken considerable work to revise the EDAQ content: developing new items and identifying Swedish items requiring changes or deletion. Cognitive debriefing interviews have been conducted. Psychometric testing has been completed (n=383). Rasch analysis has identified that all domains (sub-scales) satisfied Rasch model expectations after adjustments (by the use of testlets) for local dependency. Virtually all items had ordered thresholds, and where this was not the case, the disordering was often marginal. Differential Item Functioning (DIF) by age, gender and employment status was also largely absent, with a few notable exceptions. For example, in the domain ‘gardening and household maintenance’ the item ‘climbing ladders’ showed significant DIF by age, with older people showing greater problems with this at any given level of the trait. Most domains showed a Person Separation Index reliability (PSI) consistent with individual use, even after adjustment for local dependency (PSI =0.94 all 14 domains). Where values were lower, this was largely a consequence of skewed data and the presence of a substantive floor effect which affects the PSI; classical alpha values remained high.  All domains supported strict unidimensionality. Further testing of a revised layout UK-EDAQ has demonstrated that quality of questionnaire completion by respondents has been improved. 
The EULAR EDAQ Steering Group has therefore decided to base development work of the Dutch and German versions on the UK-EDAQ. The aims of this study are therefore to: 
1. Adapt the UK- EDAQ to the German and Dutch language. 
2. Test the psychometric properties (reliability, validity, responsiveness) of the adapted versions of the scale.