: 01.01.2012 ProjektpartnerInnen / Project partner(s) : Dr. Bart Staal und Prof. Ria Nijhuis, Center for Quality in Health Care, University of Nijmegen, Dr. Jan Kool, Rehabilitationsklinik Valens abstract The 2008 Swiss Health survey (to look for international data) revealed that 63% of adults aged of 75 years were insufficiently active or inactive and worldwide, physical inactivity is estimated to be the primary cause of approximately 21-25% of breast and colon cancers, 27% of diabetes and approximately 30% of ischemic heart disease. Physical inactivity is also a strong predictor of physical disability. Loss of mobility is often the first area in which older adults become disabled and this may be associated with loss of independence and quality of life. There is strong evidence that even very old persons benefit from physical activity and its health-related impact. (ACSM position stand 1998) 
Physical activity should not be confounded with exercise. Exercise is a subcategory of physical activity that is planned, structured, repetitive, and purposeful in the sense that the improvement or maintenance of one or more components of physical fitness is the objective (Lit). 
Physical activity promotion aims to change the PA behaviour of individuals towards a regularly active life style. The vast majority of theories applied have focused on the cognitive, affective, and social influences surrounding the individual and his/her choice to be physically active or not, i.e. applied a personal-level perspective (King AC, 2002). The theories of Reasoned Action or Planned Behaviour, decisional theories, relapse prevention models or the transtheoretical model, all focus on the intrapersonal processes, such as attitudes or beliefs. Nevertheless, PA behaviour is also dependent on the social and physical environment that may substantially interfere with individual PA behavior. 
The aim of this systematic review is to evaluate (community based?) PA promotion interventions for older people, identify the behaviour change theories applied in these interventions and to assess the quality and the evidence for the effectiveness of behaviour change techniques applied in PA promotion interventions.