Distributors and promoters of organic food claim superior tastes for their products 
compared to the conventional alternative. This argument however is still subject to a hard 
debate and thus deserves more scientific evidence. Since repurchases are dependent on 
the overall liking of a product, and sensory experiences may have an important impact, 
knowledge about these dimensions is crucial for producers and marketers of organic food 
to offer products which meet consumer expectations. The main purpose of this project 
therefore is to develop the first Organic Sensory Information System (OSIS), a multilingual 
and centrally based data folder for data deposition along with an interface scheme that 
serves as a basis for data exchange to the benefit of the organic food market (organic 
associations, producer, processors, retailer, wholesaler as well as consumers). To this aim, 
a multidisciplinary and international research approach is necessary which comprises 
sensory and consumer research linked with standards requirements in different European 
countries (CH, DE, FR, IT, NL, PL). The extendable data folder will contain descriptions of 
sensory properties of specific products from six product categories as well as information 
about underlying production methods which explain the sensory differences between 
organic and conventional as well as consumer and expectations. The comprehensive 
sensory evaluations will also result in a preference mapping of sensory quality. The impact 
of EU legislation and standards of organic farming associations, which define production 
methods and ingredients, will also be elaborated for OSIS. Qualitative and quantitative 
consumer research is carried out to develop segment-specific marketing strategies based 
on OSIS for all stakeholders involved. Comprehensive dissemination and training activities, 
including the preparation of training materials for all stakeholder groups involved a well as 
for sale staff, will ensure the broad information of the organic food market.