: 01.01.2014 ProjektpartnerInnen / Project partner(s) : Universität St. Gallen Im Zentrum der CTI Entrepreneurship Conference 2014 steht das Thema “Entrepreneurial Excellence - Learning from Leading Approaches”. Von welchen führenden Entrepreneurship Ansätzen können Schweizer Entrepreneurship Professionals lernen? Inwiefern lassen sich diese auf das Start-Up Ökosystem Schweiz übertragen? Welche Branchen und Trend bieten Entwicklungspotenzial?  
Das Programm 2014 präsentiert hochkarätige Referenten und praxisorientierte Workshops, wo sich Start-ups, Berater, Dozenten und erfahrene Gründer alljährlich treffen.  
Opening Event am 2. September 2014, um 17:00h 
Keynote von Bill Aulet, Managing Director des Martin Trust Center for MIT Entrepreneurship an der MIT Sloan School of Management zum Thema Energy Entrepreneurship.  
Workshops am 3. September 2014 
Keynote Talk von Jonathan Levie zur instutitionellen Verankerung von Entrepreneurship an Universitäten und Fachhochschulen. Jonathan Levie ist Director of Knowledge Exchange an der University of Strathclyde, der UK Entrepreneurial University of the Year“. Entrepreneurial Excellence - Learning from Leading Approaches  is at the heart of the CTI Entrepreneurship Conference 2014: From which leading entrepreneurship approaches can Swiss Entrepreneuership Professionals learn? To what extent can these be transferred to the start-up ecosystem ? Which sectors and trends offer high potential for development?  
The 2014 program will present distinguished speakers and hands-on workshops, where start-ups , consultants , lecturers and experienced founders meet every year .  
Opening Event on 2 September 2014 , at 17:00 
Keynote by Bill Aulet , Managing Director of the Martin Trust Center for MIT Entrepreneurship at the MIT Sloan School of Management on the topic of Energy Entrepreneurship .  
Workshops on 3 September 2014 
Keynote Talk by Jonathan Levie about institutional anchoring of entrepreneurship at universities. Jonathan Levie is Director of Knowledge Exchange at the University of Strathclyde, which has been awarded the UK Entrepreneurial University of the Year.