“Do Not Attempt Resuscitation” (DNAR) orders are common in patients’ charts. In Switzerland, there are neither legal regulations nor deontological recommendations for this subject. We assume that physicians make such decisions based on their medical knowledge and expected outcome of Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) and respect at best the principles of autonomy, beneficience and nonmaleficience. Involvement of other care team members, such as nurses, is not part of standard practice but may vary widely from institution to institution. So far, there are no data in Switzerland about the decision making process and its patterns in different care settings. Neither the influence of the patients’ health status assessment by different health care professionals, nor the interdisciplinary discussions between nurses and physicians nor the exact criteria on which DNAR orders are based, are known. 
Assuming that decisions are not made based on a discrete event, this qualitative study will analyze the cascade of rationales and specific actions that allow the physicians to decide within professional ethics and to find to convincing decisions in everyday practice. The study investigates the elements used to construct these rationales and the contribution of different health care professionals in the process of decision-making.  
Hypotheses: 
1)	DNAR decision processes can be clustered into specific process-patterns. 
2)	DNAR decisions considered successful reflect patients’ wishes, are seen as best pos-sible solution by physicians and nurses and show specific process-patterns 
Objectives: 
1)	to analyze the variability of a current practice in Swiss hospitals in regard to DNAR or-ders 
2)	to analyze and understand who is involved in the decisions making process as seen from the physicians’ and nurses’ perspective. 
3)	to identify the most important factors influencing the decision making process  
Methods: 
A qualitative study design, based on open interviews, is used to describe the DNAR decision-making process in Swiss hospitals, emphasizing meanings, experiences, and views of physi-cians and nurses. Data collection will target a wide range of narratives to represent the differ-ent realities in everyday practice. The study will enroll participants from departments with het-erogeneous case-mix and different procedures. 
Interviews will be transcribed and analyzed by constant comparison methods in three steps, as described in grounded theory: First, categories of acts, events and conditions are devel-oped based on their properties and dimensions by the process of open coding of the data sentence by sentence. Second, categories and subcategories will be reassembled into group-ings and linked in the process of axial coding. Third, the central themes that emerge then are moved further from a descriptive to a more analytical level by selective coding with the inten-tion to build a theory[1]. (A detailed description of qualitative methods was published by the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA) [2, 3] (see attachment).  
Significance:  
The findings will allow a better understanding of the decision-making processes and patterns and will offer insight in preferences of health care professionals in different care settings. These insights might provide valuable orientation for what is needed to pursue and further develop a patient-centred approach to DNAR-orders in the future and might justify the intro-duction and/or intensification of specific teaching programs on a pre- and postgraduate level. They could further furnish important information for the elaboration of national guidelines with regard to DNAR orders.