  Periodic and Non-periodic Coupled-cavity Semiconductor Laser Diodes  

 An inexpensive monolithic laser diode emitting at a wavelength around 850 nm would be a very attractive light source for the development of low-cost high-precision time and distance measurement systems. Such single-longitudinal-mode laser emission demands special care of the optical field within the laser cavity. Well known attempts like wavelength selective feedback can either be in the form of a distributed Bragg reflector (DBR) or it can be incorporated into the active part of the laser giving distributed feedback (DFB). Beside our activities in the area of two section DBR-laser diodes, we have focused our investigations on different multi-cavity laser structures. This work is done in strong collaboration with PSI-Zürich. As a first example we studied a 500 \gmm long Fabry- Perot SQW-AlGaAs/GaAs laser structure, consisting of an array of 20 segments, each having a length of 20 \gmm and a stripe width of 4 \gmm. This large-scale periodic structure shows excellent single-mode behaviour at 865 nm. An optimization of the number, size, spacing, and degree of periodicity of the minicavities or minilasers, as well as the size of the refractive index-step may produce even more enhanced performance. For that reason non-periodic coupled-cavity lasers have been under extensive investigation. As a second example we have analyzed self-similar and quasi-periodic multi-cavity structures modeled by a Cantoror a Fibonacci-sequence respectively. In comparison to a periodic structure especially the concept of self-similarity offers the enormous advantage of a very high distributed reflection and frequency selectivity whilst having a significant lower number of coupled cavities. We have observed, that the self-similar Cantor like laser shows strong mode selectivity. An optimization procedure based on evolutionary algorithms has led to quite similar performing laser structures. Such heuristic attempts are still under investigation. The concept of large-scale periodic or non-periodic arrays of coupled cavities is indeed very attractive because of its simple fabrication processing.