  TOPFLOW PTS  
During a Loss-Of-Coolant Accident, cold water is injected into the reactor causing Pressurized Thermal Shocks (PTS) on structural elements. Validation of the related CFD modeling will be performed using a 1:2.5 scaled down mock-up of one cold leg and down-comer of a Light Water Reactor.
During a Loss-Of-Coolant Accident (LOCA), ECCS/accumulator cold water is injected into the cold leg, which may result in crucial Pressurized Thermal Shocks (PTS) on the structural components, first of all the Reactor Primary Vessel (RPV) wall. The concern is to reliably predict/assess the thermal loads on the RPV wall, and itSs an actual issue today in view of the aging and plant life time extension. In case of some small break LOCA transients, cold water can be injected into a partially (or totally) uncovered cold leg, thus resulting in a specific two-phase flow configuration involving a dispersed two-phase flow in the cold water impinging jet area and a downstream stratified two-phase flow along the cold leg to the RPV down-comer, and possibly in the down-comer. The refined analysis of the latter configuration has concluded the open medium 3D CFD modeling of two-phase flows would enable a more accurate and reliable prediction of the temperature load on the RPV wall, as soon as the modeling is correctly validated with respect to the industrial has been designed; configurations. In that prospect, the STOPFLOW-PTS ¸ Experimental ProgramT its objective is to provide a well informed experimental data base to further: T ¸ perform validation/assessment of the complete related CFD modeling including wall-to-fluid heat transfer (mainly along the down-comer wall); T ¸ improve our understanding of the key physical involved thermal-hydraulics phenomena (mainly c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> direct contact condensation and liquid phase turbulence in the impinging jet and stratified flow areas), as well as the development and/or closure and validation of the related models. The TOPFLOW-PTS Experimental Program, jointly operated by CEA, EDF, FRAMATOME-ANP, FZR, IRSN and PSI, is an integral-type program which accounts for a correct relevance of the experimental configurations with respect to the industrial application ones, both from a geometrical and thermal-hydraulics point of view. ETHZ joint the consortium in November 2009. The programm involves: T ¸ a 1:2.5 scaled down mock-up representing a part of one cold leg and down-comer of the French CPY 900 MWe reference plant; the cold leg is modeled as a straight pipe whereas the down-comer is planar and represents a 90 r angle sector of the original down-comer. This mock-up will be ope under pressure equilibrium conditions; rated inside the TOPFLOW SDiving ¸ TankT T ¸ experiments with (i) full and partial sub-cooling of the ECC injection water, (ii) nearly saturated conditions (injection of saturated water), (iii) water injection in air environment, to check the impact of mass transfer and gas-to-liquid density ratios on the two-phase flow dynamics. Water-steam tests will be carried out at pressures up to 50 bars. The commissioning of the mock-up and its instrumentation (Stage 1) was planned beginning of 2007. Due to severe difficulties with the test facility, the commissioning took place only in 2011. The first test series, so-called steady-state Emergency Core Cooling (ECC) injection experiments where performed in 2011. The data evaluation is ongoing. The task of the Laboratory of Nuclear Energy Systems of ETHZ within the project consortium consists in the development of methods for transient velocity measurements by means of wiremesh sensors as well as in the application of these methods to the measuring data obtained during the TOPFLOW-PTS experiments in Rossendorf.