  Compact UV Waveguide Lasers 
The goal of this project is to develop a new generation of compact continuouswave UV waveguide lasers in the wavelength range between 200-350nm with an output power of a few milliwatts
Nowadays, commercially available continuous-wave (CW) ultraviolet (UV) lasers are based either on old gas-laser technology (e.g. Ar and HeCd lasers) or novel all-solid-state technology. Gas lasers are unpractical for many applications because of their large size, big electrical power consumption, and time-consuming and expensive maintenance. Solid-state lasers on the other hand became more attractive because of their smaller design, lower power consumption, and also higher reliability. However, in comparison to the visible and IR wavelength range, the palette of commercially available CW solid-state lasers covering the UV region (200-350nm) is relatively small. In particular, there is a large need for low-cost, miniature CW UV lasers with an output power of a few milliwatts. Such lasers would have a great impact in applications like laser lithography, spectroscopy, optical storage mastering and a variety of medical applications. Despite a great effort which was made in the development of UV laser diodes, the shortest wavelength of laser diodes available on the market today is 370nm. In order to achieve much shorter wavelengths, several technological problems still need to be solved. Therefore, it seems very unlikely that UV laser diodes with much shorter wavelengths will be available on the market in the near future. The goal of this project is to develop a new generation of compact continuous-wave UV waveguide lasers in the wavelength range between 200-350nm, offering an output power of a few milliwatts for an attractive price. Thus, these lasers will fill the above-mentioned product gap on the market. The new laser sources will be based on an efficient frequency doubling of visible laser light in optical waveguides fabricated from borate crystals. As a pump source miniature diode-pumped lasers or diode lasers will be used. A successful research in the frame of the proposed project will result in a technology for fabrication of high-quality optical waveguides in borate crystals. This technology will be the basis for production of unique UV lasers with very attractive properties for the laser market.