  Integration of pressure sensor for a ventricular assist device  
Integrated in the Zurich Heart collaboration, this project aims to integrate commercial pressure sensors into a ventricular assist device to enable real-time control of the device. The key challenges are the blood compatible packaging and the reliable operation of the sensor.
Heart transplantation is considered the gold standard for the treatment of patients with end-stage heart failure. However due to the lack of a sufficient number of donor organs, only a very limited number of patients can be transplanted. As a consequence, the need for an alternative treatment option has emerged. Ventricular assist devices (VADs) may be a solution. There are a number of unresolved problems associated with the use of ventricular assist devices. The contact of blood with artificial surfaces inside the pump activates blood coagulation. To avoid thrombus formation, aggressive anticoagulation and platelet inhibition is required which, in turn, increases the risk of bleeding complications. Thromboembolic complications could be markedly reduced, if the inner pump surfaces were modified and coated with biocompatible materials. Miniaturization of internal and external components would allow minimally invasive implantation with less surgical trauma to reduce perioperative stress and hospital stay. Such developments have the potential to improve the performance and lead to a wider application of VADs. The overall goal of this project is the development and exploration of concepts for intracardiac pressure sensors. Such sensors allow monitoring of the patient's status and the physiological adaptation of the pump speed to the patient's demand. These measures are required to improve the quality of life, enhance safety, and provide monitoring information for the involved medical personnel. In a first approach such intra-cardiac pressure sensors are attached to the VAD and will be connected to the control unit and power supply of the VAD. In a second step the application of such pressure sensors may be extended to implantable (passive) wireless sensors in general, because it is known that intra-cardiac pressure is an indicator for heart failure in patients, which suffered from heart attacks and survived.