  ChemIT / Active Proteomics : Chemisch modifizierte integrierte optische Wellenleiter für die Bereitstellung von Chemischer Information (Chem-IT)  

The goal of the project on SChemically ¸ modified integrated optical waveguides to yield chemical was to develop a novel highly sensitive optical sensor technology, firstinformation (CHEM-IT)T ly, for applications in medical and food analysis, secondly, for screening the activity of proteolytic enzymes. For many applications studied so far, on the one hand, the detection limit of the optical sensor technology was not sufficient (reflection spectroscopy), and, on the other hand, the sample to be investigated interfered with the optical signal (transmission, fluorescence spectroscopy). The objective of the project was to develop a highly sensitive optical setup to investigate thin films of a thickness of a few nanometer up to max. 8 micrometer attached to a planar optical transducer. The fundamentals had been acquired through long-lasting collaborations with R. Kunz at PSI Zürich, now CSEM Neuchâtel. Main applications of the technology are: 1. Highly sensitive determination and parallel screening of amines, electrolytes and other analytical parameters in food specimen. 2. Parallel screening of the activity of serine proteases in order to trace endotoxin in aqueous solutions and blood specimen. 3. Medium through-put screening of the activity of Matrix Metalloproteases (MMPs) for medical applications (Cancer research). The analysis of physiological malfunction processes, which are regulated by protease cascades, are based either on clotting tests or on cleavage of specific chromogenic and fluorogenic substrates (see M. Zimmerman et al., 1977, S.A. David et al. 1999). These methods have several restrictions. On the one hand optical tests cannot be applied to hemoglobin containing specimen and, on the other hand, the sensitivity is not satisfying. Optical investigations in attenuated total reflection (ATR) mode using integrated planar thin-film waveguides as transducers, show higher sensitivity to absorbance changes at the waveguide-sample interface than any other optical absorbance technology [1, 2]. Therefore the goals for screening protease activities were: 1. to develop specific peptide substrates labelled with chromophores absorbing at wavelengths > 630 nm. 2. to immobilize the chromogenic peptide substrate on the surface of the waveguide 3. to investigate the conditions for cleavage of the chromophore, and 4. to read the absorbance change in Stotal ¸ internal reflection modeT. In a previous project funded by KTI (project Nr. 3828.2, 1.7.1999-30.6.2002), a special optical reader was constructed in order to couple laser light into the optical waveguide, and to read out the energy (intensity) change of the outcoupled light. Studies with different immobilization techniques relied either on covalent attachment or on noncovalent adsorption of labeled enzyme substrates to the sensor surface. Several different classes of chromophores (e.g. polymethine and dicyanovinyl dyes, meldolablue derivatives and a number of 5- and 6-amino-1,4-naphthoquinone derivatives) were synthesized. Proteolytic cleavage was investigated after linking the label to a peptide of specific sequence. alfa-Trypsin was used so far as a model enzyme. The feasibility study showed a first success. Bovine alfa-trypsin activity towards a tripeptide labeled with ETHT 46 was observed on chip. The optical signal indicated a proteolytic activity which caused cleavage of < 105 chromophore molecules leaving the evanescent field within 30 min at 37oC [3]. In the next phase, the project aims at structuring the chemically modified surface on the molecular level. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2>