  THiGER: Thermoelectric microgenerators based on silicon nanowire arrays for powering micro/nanodevices  
In this project, bottom-up silicon nanowire arrays will be integrated vertically in top-down microstructures to fabricate silicon-based thermoelectric generators. This novel  thermoelectric material opens new ways for compatibly integrating thermoelectric generators into silicon microtechnology.
Miniaturized autonomous sensors usually require power in the range of 0.1-10mW. For many (extensive, inaccessible, hazardous) sensing environments, wired power may be impractical, and the denser and/or more extensive the sensor network is, the more impractical it becomes. For unwired power solutions, batteries are today the dominant energy source. Nevertheless, battery capacity remains an unsolved serious problem hindering certain applications, especially when miniaturized nodes are involved in which space constraints demand smaller batteries that feature an even more limited energy capacity. This implies regular battery replacement, which has important economic and environmental downsides. Other compact, low-cost and lightweight energy sources are needed for those devices. One possibility is using energy from the ambient. As a possible alternative, energy harvesting provides numerous benefits to the end user when applicable. Some of them are common to batteries and are related to the inherent advantages linked to unwired power: it reduces installation cost, it offers greater flexibility, and it can be applicable for moving and rotating equipment. However, energy harvesting offers distinct advantages over the use of primary batteries: it reduces the maintenance cost, it provides long term solutions (as long as the ambient energy is available), it enables sensing and actuation capabilities in hard-to-access hazardous environments, and it reduces environmental impact. This project addresses the development of energy harvesting microstructures suitable for solving energy autonomy issues of devices working in low-power regimes (nano/microdevices, smartcards, sensor networks, etc). The focus of the project is placed on the microdomain to obtain small size devices with high energy density features, and on the silicon technology friendliness of the materials (and approaches) employed to assure the eventual manufacturability, integration and cost effectiveness of the related devices/solutions. The microenergy elements of interest for this project are thermoelectric harvesters given that waste heat is one of the most common environmental energy sources. These devices will be developed in the microdomain, in a way that enables the high volume, cost-effective and sustainable fabrication that will support the advent of energy autonomy solutions required by the eventual success of numerous applications. In this project, a low dimensional material (crystalline Si nanowires) in combination with different fabrication techniques (bottom-up and top-down approaches) and a vertical device architecture will shape the base of an all silicon-based thermoelectric microgenerator.