  Moving Organisms and Changing Environments (MOCE)  
Soil mixing experiment on carbon flux to the soil microbial community and plant nitrogen and phosphorus nutrition
The large majority of wild and crop plants lives in mutually beneficial symbioses with ubiquitous and abundant arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF). These symbioses alter how nutrients flow to plants and thereby affect primary production. Changes to plant growth in turn also affect the resource supply to the web of heterotrophic plant-associated microbes. Yet, our mechanistic understanding at the organismic level of involved regulatory processes is still limited. Such information is, however, needed, if we are to understand and predict outcomes of perturbation events, such as soil works, inoculation and land use as well as climatic change, which trigger AMF community (re-)assembly. Here, we propose to examine resource-driven community processes with potential climate- and ecosystem-relevance. In a growth trial in the glasshouse, we intend to confront two compositionally different natural AMF assemblages with each other by mixing field soil samples. The experiment will be directly informed by a running field experiment (SNF project: 31003A_127522). Biotic and abiotic effects on plant growth, nutrient fluxes, and AMF community assembly will be disentangled by control treatments with single soils and soil mixtures with one or both components gamma-irradiated. The mixing of the soils and thereby introduction of foreign AMF may functionally saturate reconstituted AMF assemblages, but it may also simultaneously open new niches for immigrants. Influences on the plant-microbe-soil study system by normal epidemic population expansions will be discriminated from effects by competing residents and immigrants in comparisons of the treatments with native and gamma-irradiated soil. Immigration of relatively maladapted immigrants may impair mycorrhizal mutualistic functioning. The planned isotope tracing (33P, 15N) of mycorrhiza-mediated mineral nutrient fluxes and 13CO2 pulse-labelling of photosynthetates in the plant-mycorrhiza-soil system shall provide supportive evidence for or against this concern. PCR-based community profiling will be used to quantify differences in composition and structure among all reconstituted AMF assemblages.