  On Quantifying Operational Security (SecMetrics) 
The objective of this project is to develop a framework for quantitative security metrics as an indicator of the vulnerability and attack proneness of an IT system consisting  of stationary or mobile networked nodes.
Security metrics constitute a QoS indicator of the vulnerability and attack proneness of an exposed system, reflecting the extensiveness and effectiveness of the safeguard measures undertaken and capturing its ability to withstand and survive an attack. Currently, most approaches in this direction assess infor nmation security in a qualitative way, focusing mostly on empirical guidelines regarding optimal configuration of components and providing security assurances if some basic preconditions are met. These static properties often fail to capture the attack proneness of the infrastructure, its ability to resist malicious activities, and its state evolution during ongoing attacks. The goal of this project is to provide a rigorous, concrete methodology, to effectively quantify the security assurance level of an exposed information system. The derived security metrics should reflect whether specific principal requirements such as confidentiality, integrity, and availability are respected, support different attacker and defender models involving different levels of intelligence and sophistication, capture the security dynamics of an evolving networked system. Our proposed approach consists of two equally important steps We collect and analyze real-life traces from different vantage points of the infrastructure. Information from diverse heterogeneous sensors deployed in the infrastructure, including flow data, security incidents and intrusion detection logs, historical data, and vulnerability scanner reports, will provide us with a rich dataset capturing correlations among different security events. Statistical analysis, information fusion, and data mining techniques will be employed to identify the system characteristics within the observation space that have a dominant impact on the security evolution of the infrastructure. Building a predictor that would map these characteristics to the probability of the system being compromised or exhibiting some type of malicious activity, is effectively the end goal of this process. We derive a probabilistic model that will capture the evolution of security characteristics of a system and its ability to provide critical services in the presence of attacks. This probabilistic approach of quantifying security is a highly desirable abstraction since intrusion tolerance, and survivability, are driven by human behavior, which is inherently stochastic.