  Stochastic Model Predictive Control  
This project deals with theoretical foundations of stochastic model-predictive  or rolling-horizon control. In particular, we treat convex approximation schemes of constrained stochastic control problems, recovery strategies post state constraint violation, and decentralized MPC schemes.
We seek to develop a framework, computational tools and theoretical support for stochastic model predictive control methods. In recent years, model predictive control has become a well developed, widely accepted and widely used method for controlling systems in the presence of constraints. Model predictive control is based on using a model of the system to predict its future evolution, solving an optimization problem to determine the input strategy that leads to the best future evolution, applying the initial part of this strategy and repeating the process using feedback from the outcome. A limitation of the majority of current model predictive control strategies is that they are not able to deal explicitly with probabilistic uncertainty: They rely either on ignoring this uncertainty (which tends to make the predictions optimistic), or treating it in a "worst case" manner (which tends to make the predictions pessimistic). Our aim is to alleviate this limitation and develop model predictive control methods that can explicitly take into account stochastic uncertainty. The main emphasis will be to base this stochastic model predictive control framework on solid theoretical foundations. We will start by formalizing the classes of stochastic model predictive control problems (dynamics, cost functions, constraints) that are relevant to applications. We will then determine which of these problems are amenable to efficient convex optimization methods. For the remaining problems we will develop approximate optimization schemes based on randomized algorithms. The results will be applied to proof-ofconcept studies from the area of air traffic control. We will also explore the potential for application of the results to other areas, to establish direction for follow-on research and exploitation of the results.