  New approaches for the biological control of forest insect pests 
We are analyzing the bacterial midgut flora of the important forest tree  pest Lymantria dispar using cultivation dependent and independent methods. We further screen for new biocontrol bacteria and develope strategies for the control of L. dispar using combinations of different biocontrol bacter
Applied insect pathology has more and more focused on efforts to adjust pathogens to be used as biopesticides, since they have many benefits: they are safe for humans and the environment, they are specific for target organisms, and can increase the activity of other natural enemies of plant pests. The first step in the search for new entomopathogens of a specific insect pest is the investigation of its midgut microflora. It has been shown that part of insect midgut microflora content comes from ingested plant material (Staudachere et al., 2011). Latest investigations conclude, that certain phylogenetic subgroups of plant-associated pseudomonads, which were so far only known for excellent capacities as biocontrol agents of fungal plant diseases, also exhibit potent insecticidal activity (Pecky-Tarr et al. 2008, Ruffner et al., 2012). The first aim of this exchange is to analyze the natural midgut microflora of significant forest pest gypsy moth and to screen isolated bacteria for insecticidal activity. The second aim is to find new combinations of bacteria with synergistic activity and the third aim is to screen the midgut microflora of important forest insect pests for the presence of insecticidal pseudomonads. Therefore, the follwoing tasks will be adressed: 1) Analysis of the culturable and unculturable bacterial midgut flora of L. dispar; 2) screening the bacterial community of L. dispar and other forest pests for the presence of insecticidal pseudomonads; 3) Screening L. dispar midgut isolates for insecticidal activity; 4) search for strain combinations with synergistic activity. Expected result of this cooperation are: the identification of bacterial species present in L. dispar midgut, information on presence and frequency of pseudomonads with insecticidal activity in the gut of Latvian forest insect pests, identification and evaluation of the most promising synergistic combinations of bacteria, that could be used for biocontrol of lepidopteran insect pests.