  K-Content: Content abstraction and retrieval for large-scale mobile service  
we propose to assist with the further development of the new kooaba services, through IM2 technology transfer from the BIWI (ETH Zurich) and the Viper group (Un. of Geneva) to kooaba  AG.
kooaba1, a spin-off of the Computer Vision Laboratory (BIWI) at ETHZ, offers a service which lets users acquire information about an object, by simply taking a snapshot with their mobile phone (e.g., a movie poster, a billboard, a DVD or CD cover, or a landmark). The company has been selected as one of 13 finalists among over 1000 candidates by the SF startup TV show, and was a Red Herring Top 100 finalist. Since launching its first service in 2006, kooaba has gained substantial hands-on experience with the markets for such visual retrieval, with the corresponding user requirements, and with the necessary scalability in terms of the numbers of reference images and the numbers of users. So far, kooaba has offered products mostly for the advertising market (interactive print advertising). Recently, kooaba was able to create prototypes of novel, large-scale mobile search products, which have raised significant interest from larger companies in the mobile and media industries. In the current economic crisis, however, kooaba risks having to postpone the completion and market introduction of these novel product lines. Instead, it may find itself forced to put increased effort into strengthening the user base for its existing products. Thus, we propose to assist with the further development of the new kooaba services, through IM2 technology transfer from the BIWI (ETH Zurich) and the Viper group (Un. of Geneva) to kooaba AG. The partners have already cooperated successfully at prior occasions, since part of the background technology integrated within the current Kooaba system stems from research activities within IM2. Two inter-related main tracks of development have been identified for this project, namely largescale multimodal indexing and automated labelling of crawled data. These themes have been extensively studied by ETHZ and University of Geneva since the start of IM2 and guarantee possibilities of fast transfer. The real-world conditions kooaba operates under (limited low-quality user input, largescale corpora, tight conditions for user satisfaction,...), define relevant applied research challenges for the two academic partners to further develop the two tracks. We propose an applied research project, where the industrial partner not only provides data, but also continuously evaluates the outcome of the research in realistic scenarios. The aim is to strengthen kooabaSs position on the market, by deepening its technological base and by widening its product portfolio, and thereby to ensure its viability and growth.