  Applied Vision Research - Virtual Reality: Projecting Work Place Conditions into the Laboratory  

 Fitting the task to the man, the purpose of ergonomics, needs research in the field as well as in the laboratory. More variables can be controlled in the laboratory compared to the field. However, laboratory conditions are often said to be "artificial". Among the causes enforcing this statement unrealistic visual and acoustic conditions play an important role. In addition to an unequal stimulation of perceptive mechanisms, this fact probably acts as a stress reducing component and coping with strain appears more pronounced under laboratory conditions than in the field. Different implications for findings derived from laboratory studies are therefore expected. Among others, asthenopic complaints belong to those variables in the stress - strain complex that are invisible in terms of the above formulated problem. Due to a lack of knowledge about number, quality and quantity of influencing factors, e.g. depth perception or 3D hearing, at tasks where operator supported manipulations take place, laboratory studies might involuntary limit research. Therefore there is a need to study man at work in the laboratory, but under conditions as close as possible to those in the field. For this purpose a room has been built up to enable the virtual presentation of visual and acoustic surroundings of work places. A silicon graphics computer system enables the presentation of the visual world by means of a projection technique similar to that demonstrated at Sigraph'92 by Cruz - Neira et al. (three walls, floor and ceiling projections using 5 projectors). Double quadraphonic sound equipment, driven by a pentium based PC, is used to control acoustic surroundings. Within this virtual work place experiments concerning different topics are carried out. Among these, asthenopic complaints are investigated under varying visual and acoustic noise levels, i.e. intensity of complaints is correlated e.g. with number, quality and quantity of visual and acoustic distracters. The operators ability in manipulation tasks is studied on the one hand at realistic but virtual visual conditions including depth perception cues. On the other hand topographical data is fed back by different modalities such as to the visual, auditory and tactile systems.