  Swiss Virtual Campus - GITTA  
Geographic information science and technology has been split into different areas in recent years. For numerous disciplines, it is now an indispensable tool for processing geographical data. The GITTA project sets out to integrate these separate strands into a single course of study.
Due to the increasing importance of spatial information in private and public life today and in future, there is a need to emphasise the education in Cartography and GI Science. With the new web technologies it is possible to turn studies in those fields into multimedia enriched courses and reach people in most remote areas. GITTA [Geographic Information Technology Training Alliance], initiated by the Swiss Virtual Campus in 2001, is an interactive multilingual pool of learning materials that can be used for different courses. The technical know-how available allows to establish such materials and online courses with the auspicious XML-Standards on a modular base. Since 2003 GITTA is used in teaching at basic and intermediate levels at Universities and Universities of Applied Sciences throughout Switzerland. Experiences show that the development of homogeneous content and the creation of consistent as well as sustainable learning materials in a relatively heterogeneous environment impose some major challenges. On the way to make the proved didactical ECLASS [Entry, Clarify, Look, Act, Self-Assessment, Summary] structure and the content available for other interested parties, there were two fields of major interest to pay attention to. On one hand the original GITTA XML structure to be revised to make it easier and usable for any author. Non-used parts are weeded out and the previously integrated database omitted while retaining all functionalities. The advantages are gathered and retained in the XML-based content structure ELML [E-Lesson Markup Language] that is now freely available. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> Since 2006 GITTA materials are open content under a creative commons license. Authors from the world-wide community of Cartography and GI Science may log into the system and register. After registration they can use the content and may send feedback contributions that will be evaluated by a qualified group of known specialists. Opening the learning materials and allowing others to contribute and benefit ensures the survival and further development of the original GITTA learning materials. With the formation of a GITTA development association in November 2006 more and more synergies may be used and will assure quality education in Cartography and GI Science world-wide at low cost particularly in economically hard times.