  COST E53: Development of an Efficient Scheme for Timber Machine Stress Grading  
The aim and main objective of the proposed research project is to provide all involved parties an efficient scheme for machine timber grading. 
Despite the high potential of modern machine grading systems to assess the timber strength, machine grading is rarely utilized in practice; timber at the market is still predominantly visually graded. The high potential of machine grading for improving the efficiency of using timber in load-bearing structures and therefore to assure and competitiveness of timber with other building materials is not used to the full extend. This, because many timber-producing companies do not invest in expensive grading systems and current normative policies do not allow the consistent integration of the information gathered during the grading process and therefore do not facilitate the probabilistic modeling of graded timber material properties. In order to stay competitive the forestry-wood-structural timber chain needs to increase its efforts towards improved methods of quality control throughout the whole production line. The aim and main objective of the proposed research project is to provide all involved parties an efficient scheme for machine timber grading. The work will deliver a theoretical framework for the probabilistic modeling of graded timber material properties. A best practice procedure for timber grading will be developed considereing all the needs and technical requirements indentified throughout this project. In a case study, in close collaboration with the Swiss timber industry, the possible benefits of advanced grading systems will be shown and the results will be actively disseminated. The proposed research project is conducted in connection with the COST action E 53. The future achivements of the proposed research project will provide major contributions to this COST action. Simultaneously the COST action E53 will provide a platform of international experts to frequently discuss critically the achievements of the research project to the benefit of the overall impact and relevance of the work.