  EU Network of Excellence in Embedded System Design ARTIST2/ARTISTDesign  
The main objective of Artist NoE is to become a virtual Center of Excellence in Embedded Systems Design. ETHZ is basically involved in the Platforms and MPSoC  Design cluster, which has as main purpose the integration of different view points and approaches in MPSoC design and programming.
The main objective of the Artist Network of Excellence is to build on previous existing structures and links forged between the central players of the European research community, and to become a virtual Center of Excellence in Embedded Systems Design. In the area of Embedded Systems Design, four essential topics are identified, for which existing techniques should be adapted and extended: - Modeling and Validation; - Software Synthesis, Code Generation and Timing Analysis; - Real-Time Operating Systems Scheduling and Networks; - Platforms and MPSoC Design. Integrating these results in a coherent design flow is the main scientific and technical objective of the Artist NoE. The integration will be achieved for design flows ensuring given essential properties such as adaptivity, predictability, dependability, efficiency, etc. ETHZ is basically involved in the Platforms and MPSoC Design cluster, which has as main purpose the integration of different view points and approaches in MPSoC design and programming. The cluster considers the hardware architecture and software components in their interaction, investigates tools for accurate estimation of certain design parameters (power, performance), and provides the designer with adequate support for design space exploration and optimization. For the MPSoC design, the focus is on how to map complex applications onto multi-core hardware platforms, while addressing issues like scalability, flexibility, composability, predictability, designtime reduction and increased dynamism. The main challenge stands in developing the formal and algorithmic frameworks required for the design space exploration and optimization of highly complex multi-core platforms. For the MPSoC analysis, the goal is to establish a set of models and analysis methods that (a) scale to massively parallel and heterogeneous multiprocessor architectures, (b) allow for the analysis of global system predictability and efficiency, and (c) take the available hardware resources and the corresponding sharing strategies into account. In order to reach all these objectives, we will use the expertise that is already available at ETH Zurich, but as well partners like University Bologna, TU Braunschweig, VERIMAG Grenoble, SSSA Pisa, and University Dortmund will be very closely involved in these activities.