  Micromanipulation with ultrasound  
In micro and nano technologies, the manipulation of micron-sized objects  is often required; the aim of the research is to achieve this by use of ultrasonic standing waves. This forms part of a collaborative project to produce a system involving microgrippers, part manipulation and nanopositioning.
The project involves the manipulation of micro-particles within a fluid which is a necessity in many micro technologies. This manipulation can consist of positioning, alignment or sorting and will be performed by use of ultrasonic standing waves. This research is part of a collaborative project which aims to produce an integrated and economically viable system involving microgrippers, part manipulation and nanopositioning. The general setup is shown in Fig. 1. A glass plate, that is excited to mechanical vibrations, emits a sound field into an adjacent fluid. This sound field concentrates particles in certain positions in the fluid. The particles can either be concentrated at locations directly on a plane surface or they can levitate freely in the fluid. These particles can be micromechanical components, biological cells or small amounts of chemicals. This method makes possible the contactless assembly of micromechanical structures, the positioning of cells under a microscope and the handling of a chemical in a fluid, amongst many other applications. State of the Art The physical effect that is used in this method is often called acoustical force or acoustical pressure: On particles in a sound field like, a standing wave, acts a force that directs the particles to certain locations in the sound field. After this effect was known since the 19th century first applications were introduced in the forties of the last century. In this section methods characterized by the following properties will be mentioned in a particular paragraph: methods using plane waves, methods capable to handle single or few particles and methods using a plurality of transducers. Known applications concern filters with which solid or liquid particles can be separated from a fluid. In [1], [2] and [3] such principles and applications are described. Often a one-dimensional standing sound wave is established in a fluid and this fluid flows perpendicular (or nearly perpendicular) to the propagation direction of the sound wave. Due to the acoustical forces suspended particles are collected in lines or planes and can than be separated. The concentration efficiency can be improved by the use of a one-dimensional ultrasound beam consisting of a superposition of many standing waves differing in frequency [4]. [5] introduces a technique where two ultrasound beams intersect each other and form in a liquid column a sound field where particles are concentrated in lines. In addition several methods to position single or few particles in one or two dimensions were developed. A method capable of levitating single objects in air vertically in one dimension has previously been described [6]. In [7] and [8] particles are trapped by special sound fields. [9] and [10] concern techniques to position single particles where [9] uses waveguides to couple mechanical waves into a fluid drop on a surface and in [10] the particle is held by sound field excited by c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> two focused transducers. Whereas the above mentioned principles use one or few transducers, [11] and [12] use a plurality of transducers in the form of a one- or two-dimensional array. Therefore it is possible to shape a quasi arbitrary sound field with which particles could be positioned arbitrarily. The drawback of this method is that the control devices is very complex, because each of the transducers has to be accessed independently. State of Our Research At the Center of Mechanics of the Institute of Mechanical Systems we have developed a method that uses acoustical forces to position particles in one or two dimensions. The principle setup as shown in Fig 1 and Fig 2 shows a photograph of the resulting distribution of 10 ¸ tm glass spheres. In this case the glass plate is 13 mm square and 1mm thick, excitation at 1 MHz results in a wavelength of approximately 2.3mm in the glass plate. The advantage of our method lies in the following points: TSimplicity: ¸ The setup comprises only a few geometrically simple components. TEasy ¸ to run: The transducers can easily be run with a single frequency. A complex control device is not necessary. TPositioning ¸ in one or two dimensions: Particles can be positioned in one or two dimensions. TPositioning ¸ in more than one plane: Particles can be positioned either staying in contact with the plane surface or levitating freely in the fluid in different planes. TMultiple ¸ handling: Due to repetitive structure of the sound field a simultaneous handling of many particles is possible. The current task is to miniaturize this system and investigate a variety of methods in which once located the particles can be moved. References Gröschl M.; Ultrasonic Separation of Suspended Particles - Part I: Fundamentals, Ultrasonic Separation of Suspended Particles - Part II: Design and Operation of Separation Devices; Acustica 1998; Vol. 84, Iss. 4, pp 632-642. Apfel R. E.; Acoustic Radiation Pressure - Principles and Application to Separation Science; Fortschritte der Akustik 1990; Vol. Iss. pp 19-36. Benes E., Burger W., Groeschl M. and Trampler F.; Method for Treating a Liquid, 1995; Patent Nr. EP0633049. Umemura S.-I., Shimizu N., Takeda K., Tamura M. and Yasuda K.; Method and Apparatus for Handling Particles by Acoustic Radiation, 1997; Patent Nr. EP0773055; Schram C. J.; Manipulating Means Utilizing Ultrasonic Wave Energy for Use with Particulate Material 1991; Patent Nr. US5006266. Lierke E. G.; Akustische Postionierung - Ein Umfassendener Überblick Über Grundlangen Und Anwendungen; Acustica - acta acustica 1996; Vol. 82, Iss. 2, pp 220-237. Kozuka T., Tuziuti T., Mitome H. and Fukuda T.; Control of a Standing Wave Field Using a LineFocused Transducer for Two-Dimensional Manipulation of Particles; Japanese Journal of Applied c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> Physics Part 1-Regular Papers Short Notes & Review Papers 1998; Vol. 37, Iss. 5B, pp 2974-2978. Yamakoshi Y. and Noguchi Y.; Micro Particle Trapping by Opposite Phases Ultrasonic Travelling Waves; Ultrasonics 1998; Vol. 36, Iss. 8, pp 873-878. Takeuchi M. and Yamanouchi K.; Ultrasonic Micromanipulation of Small Particles in Liquid; Japanese Journal of Applied Physics Part 1-Regular Papers Short Notes & Review Papers 1994; Vol. 33, Iss. 5B, pp 3045-3047. Wu J. R.; Acoustical Tweezers; Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 1991; Vol. 89, Iss. 5, pp 2140-2143. Mitome H., Kozuka T. and Tuziuti T.; Non-Contact Micromanipulation Method and Apparatus, 2000; Patent Nr. US6055859. Umemura S.-I., Kamahori M., Sasaki K., Takeda K., Uchida K., Yasuda K., Harada Y. and Kawabata K.; Particle Handling Apparatus for Handling Particles in Fluid by Acoustic Radiation Pressure, 2001; Patent Nr. US6216538.