  Decentralised urine treatment with the nitritation/anammox process (DUNOX)  
Nitritation/anammox is an energy-efficient and reliable process for nitrogen removal from urine. A comparison of different reactors and an investigation of possible  problems such as production of harmful gases or inhibition by organic substances will help to further optimise the process operation.
1 Problem and Objectives Urine accounts for less than 1% of the total wastewater volume but contains around 80% of the total nitrogen load (Larsen and Lienert 2007). Due to the high concentrations, nu-trient removal from urine is potentially much cheaper and less energy intensive than from combined wastewater (Maurer et al. 2003). Previous research at Eawag has shown that the implementation of a urine source separation system would be accepted from society as long as the same level of bathroom comfort is maintained (Larsen and Lienert 2007). Technical solutions for the implementation of a complete NoMix system are though not yet fully developed. The main missing component is a suitable process for nitrogen removal from urine. Nitrogen is not a limited resource and a direct recovery for fertiliser is not interesting in most places. The focus is therefore on nitrogen removal rather than on recovery. Bio-logical processes are generally cheaper and less risky for health and environment than chemical processes. Based on previous research, the nitritation/anammox process is ideal for nitrogen removal from sourceseparated urine (Udert et al. 2008). The process is very resource efficient and it was implemented successfully in several full-scale treat-ment plants for nitrogen removal from digester supernatant. To confirm the suitability of the nitritation/anammox process for decentralised nitrogen removal from source-separated urine and to further optimise the process operation, some aspects need to be analysed in more detail. This will be done by pursuing the fol-lowing four objectives: Objective 1: Identify the conditions that lead to nitric oxide and nitrous oxide pro-duction during nitritation/anammox processes Production of nitric oxide and nitrous oxide has been frequently observed in the nitrita-tion/anammox and other nitrogen removal processes (Fux et al. 2006; Kampschreur et al. 2008a; Kampschreur et al. 2008b; Kampschreur et al. 2009). Clark-type microsensors will be used to quantify nitric and nitrous oxide production during nitritation/anammox treatment of urine. Results from measurements under different conditions during normal operation and in additional batch experiments will allow identifying the conditions which lead to a substantial production of the two harmful gases and should therefore be avoided. Objective 2: Determine the influence of organic matter on nitritation In contrast to digester supernatant, urine contains not only high amounts of nitrogen but also high amounts of organic substances. Previous experiments with urine indicated that ammonia oxidation is inhibited during the degradation of the organic substances. The effect of organic matter on nitritation will be studied in batch experiments and by testing different COD/N ratios in the influent of a sequencing batch reactor. Measured data will be used to calibrate and validate an AQUASIM model which can then be used to opti-mise reactor operation. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> Objective 3: Characterise the nitritation/anammox process with online measure-ments of pH, conductivity and dissolved oxygen In order to determine the optimal parameters for process control, it is currently neces-sary to monitor the system with regular measurements of the nitrogen compounds. A characterisation of the process with simple online-measurements such as conductivity or pH would simplify the monitoring and allow a remote controlling of the system, which is essential for small decentralised reactors. Measured data from different cycles of an SBR will be used to calibrate and validate an AQUASIM model. The model will be able to determine the parameters for the process control and to recognise possible process failures. Objective 4: Compare different reactor types and operation modes In previous experiments with an activated sludge sequencing batch reactor, reactor per-formance significantly decreased after increasing the exchange rate and the air supply. It is hypothesised that anammox bacteria are better protected from oxygen and washout in biofilm than in activated sludge reactors. Furthermore, it is hypothesised that changing conditions, i.e. high/low availability of COD, are required to reach sufficient nitrogen re-moval. Two rotating biological contactors (sequencing batch/continuous operation) and an activated sludge sequencing batch reactor will be operated in parallel. A combination of chemical and microbiological analyses will be used to compare the three systems. 2 Current state of knowledge and embedding in current research at the institute 2.1 Decentralised Urine Treatment In most industrialised countries, wastewater is currently collected in large sewer systems and treated in centralised wastewater treatment plants. However, this system is not very resource-efficient (Larsen and Gujer 1997) and in developing countries, success has been very limited so far (Schertenleib et al. 2003). A number of European research groups therefore started to investigate new approaches to wastewater management, based on source separation and decentralisation (Otterpohl et al. 1997; Wilderer and Schreff 2000). also called NoMix technoThe Eawag project Novaquatis confirmed that urine source separation U would be a viable alternative to conventional wastewater manage-ment in an industrialised logy U country such as Switzerland (Larsen et al. 2001).Technical so-lutions for the implementation of a complete NoMix system are though not yet fully de-veloped. The main missing component is a suitable process for nitrogen removal from urine. While precipitation of phosphorus from urine is a relatively well understood and simple process (Udert et al. 2003a; Udert et al. 2003b; Udert et al. 2003c), nitrogen re-moval from urine has been researched far less. 2.2 Biological nitrogen removal Biological nitrogen removal from wastewater is commonly performed by autotrophic nitri-fication followed by heterotrophic denitrification. Alternatively ammonium is oxidised to nitrite only (autotrophic nitritation) and subsequently directly reduced to N2 (heterotrophic denitritation). About a decade ago, autotrophic denitrification was detected on different wastewater treatment plants (Mulder et al. 1995; Siegrist et al. 1998). The responsible bacteria were identified as planctomycetes (Strous et al. 1999) and are generally known as anaerobic ammonium oxidisers (anammox). Nitritation/anammox is a combination of autotrophic nitritation followed by the anammox reac- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> tion. Compared to conventional nitri-fication/denitrification, nitritation/anammox requires up to 58% less oxygen and no exter-nal carbon source needs to be added. At Eawag, nitritation/anammox processes have been successfully applied for the treat-ment of digester supernatant (Salzgeber et al. 2007; Siegrist et al. 2008). In contrast to digester supernatant urine however does not only contain high ammonium concentra-tions but also high amounts of biodegradable organic substances. Previous experiments with wastewaters containing similar amounts of organic matter are scarce and the re-sults are contradictory (Chen et al. 2009; Xu et al. 2010). At Eawag, previous research however showed that nitritation/anammox is a suitable process for nitrogen removal from five-times diluted (Udert et al. 2008) and most likely also from undiluted urine. 2.3 Influence of organic matter on nitritation Measurements from a cycle in a sequencing batch reactor treating urine with the nitrita-tion/anammox process are displayed in Figure 1. The ammonium concentration de-creases only slightly during the first two hours, which coincides with the period where the largest part of the biodegradable organic matter is degraded. It is therefore very likely that the inhibition of ammonia oxidation in the beginning of the cycle is connected with the presence of biodegradable organic matter. In the literature, several organic components of urine were found to inhibit ammonia oxi-dation, though at much higher concentrations than what can be found in the sequencing batch reactor (Eilersen et al. 1994; Dyreborg and Arvin 1995; Gomez et al. 2000; Morita et al. 2007; Texier and Gomez 2007). Furthermore, (Hanaki et al. 1990) observed that organic matter inhibits ammonia oxidation by provoking the growth of heterotrophic bac-teria which reduces the available ammonia for ammonia oxidation. Since urine contains large amounts of nitrogen, an ammonia limitation is rather unlikely. Extensive growth of heterotrophic bacteria might however result in an oxygen limitation of ammonia oxidation. 2.4 Nitric oxide and nitrous oxide Nitric oxide and nitrous oxide are both harmful gases which are unwanted in the off gas of nitrogen removal processes. Nitrous oxide has an exceptionally high global warming potential and catalyzes the destruction of the ozone layer (Solomon et al. 2007). Nitric oxide is rapidly oxidized to NO2 which is a precursor of ozone in the troposphere and together with sulphur dioxide responsible for acid rain (von Schulthess et al. 1994b). Both gases are obligatory intermediates of heterotrophic denitrification and thus, ele-vated concentrations primarily emerge from incomplete heterotrophic denitrification (von Schulthess 1994a; Murray and Knowles 2001; Fux et al. 2006). Under suboptimal growth conditions, nitrifiers can also produce nitric oxide and nitrous oxide (Kampschreur et al. 2008a). Chemical production from nitrous acid and hydroxylamine is another pos-sible source (Colliver and Stephenson 2000). 3 Detailed research plan Task 1: Identify the conditions that lead to nitric oxide and nitrous oxide produc-tion during nitritation/anammox processes The suitability of Clark-electrodes for the measurement of NO and N2O in the liquid phase of urine treatment reactors was confirmed in a previous project at Eawag (Jenni et al.). These electrodes will be used to measure the production of both gases in batch ex-periments under different conditions regarding the concentrations of oxygen and nitrite as well as the availability of organic c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 4> substances. Based on the results, an existing Aqua-sim model for the nitritation/anammox process will be extended with the production of both gases and calibrated with additional measurements in a sequencing batch reactor. In order to assess the significance of possible nitric oxide and nitrous oxide emissions from a nitritation/anammox reactor, different scenarios will be implemented in the se-quencing batch reactor. The model will be used to select the conditions which should lead to high production of both gases. Emission of both gases can be estimated with their liquid concentrations and the parameters of the aeration system. If possible, the concentrations of both gases will also be measured directly in the off-gas with Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy. Task 2: Determine the influence of organic matter on nitritation Batch experiments with different conditions regarding the concentrations of oxygen and ammonium as well as the availability and the type of organic matter will be conducted. Based on the results, an existing Aquasim model for the nitritation/anammox process will be extended with an effect of the organic matter on nitritation and calibrated with addi-tional measurements in a sequencing batch reactor. An inhibition of nitritation by organic matter could either be caused by the organic sub-stances themselves (depending on the COD concentration) or by an oxygen limitation due to extensive heterotrophic activity (depending on the COD/N ratio). In case the inhi-bition depends on the COD concentration, a stepwise addition of the influent will be beneficial while a degradation of part of the organic matter prior to the addition into the reactor would be beneficial in case of a connection with the COD/N ratio. The Aquasim model will be used to determine the optimal process operation which will then be tested in a sequencing batch reactor. Task 3: Characterise the nitritation/anammox process with online measurements of pH, conductivity and dissolved oxygen In a first step, the existing Aquasim model will be expanded in order to be able to ade-quately describe pH, conductivity and dissolved oxygen in a sequencing batch reactor treating urine with the nitritation/anammox process. Data sets from SBR cycles with dif-ferent influents and operation conditions will be collected and used to calibrate and vali-date the model. In a second step, the model will be used to examine whether it is possible to identify the ongoing biological processes and to differ between ammonium oxidation, anammox and denitrification based on pH, conductivity and dissolved oxygen measurements. The model will also be used to determine how measured data of these three parameters can be used for the process control and to detect possible process failures. If the process cannot be adequately described with pH, conductivity and dissolved oxygen measure-ments alone, measured data from another simple electrode without much maintenance effort (e.g. redox potential) will be added. Part of this task will be performed within the scope of a master thesis in the beginning of the project. In order to be able to include the results from objective 1, this task will not be finished before objective 1 is completed. Task 4: Compare different reactor types and operation modes The following three reactors will be run in parallel: (1) activated sludge reactor in se-quencing batch mode, (2) rotating biological contactor in sequencing batch mode and (3) rotating biological contactor in continuous mode. The performance of the three reactors will be assessed with regular measurements of the nitrogen compounds and the chemi-cal oxygen demand (COD) in the influent and effluent and the operation scheme will be continuously optimised for maximum nitrogen c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 5> removal based on the current performance. The comparison of the two sequencing batch reactors will focus on the conditions anammox bacteria can find inside the biofilm and the sludge flocs. A combination of fluo-rescence in-situ hybridisation with confocal laser scanning microscopy (FISH-CLSM) will be used to visualise the spatial arrangement of the different groups of bacteria and es-pecially the anammox bacteria. An estimation of the oxygen penetration depth with Aq-uasim models will show if anammox bacteria are protected from oxygen in their location. A quantification of the anammox bacteria with real time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) will help to assess whether anammox bacteria are better protected from wash out in the biofilm than in the sludge flocs. The comparison of the two rotating biological contactors will focus on the process per-formance of the different operation modes. The removal rates of nitrogen and organic compounds will show whether it is possible to reach the same performance with con-tinuous mode as with sequencing batch mode. PCR followed by denaturating gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) will be used to assess the diversity and stability of the mi-crobial communities in the two reactors which will then be compared with the reactor performances. 4 Significance for science and economy Decentralised collection and treatment of urine is an efficient and effective measure to reduce nitrogen flows (Larsen et al. 2007), which is in many parts of the world essential for the protection of aquatic ecosystems. However, technical solutions for the implemen-tation of an entire NoMix strategy are not yet completed. The main missing component is a suitable process for nitrogen removal from urine. With this project, an important step towards the development of a reliable small scale reactor for nitrogen removal from urine will be made. This project will also help to identify possible problems in the nitritation/anammox proc-ess, such as an inhibition by organic matter or a production of toxic gases. This will help to better understand this novel nitrogen removal process and to minimise emissions of hazardous gases from nitrogen removal processes in general. In small decentralised reactors without continuous survey, process control is a major challenge. The process operation should therefore be simple and allow a remote-controlling of the system. A characterisation of the process with online measurements of simple electrodes without much maintenance effort such as pH, conductivity and dis-solved oxygen will help to simplify process control of nitrogen removal processes in gen-eral and allow a remote-controlling of small decentralised reactors. 5 References Chen H., Liu S., Yang F., Xue Y. and Wang T. (2009) The development of simultaneous partial nitrification, ANAMMOX and denitrification (SNAD) process in a single reactor for nitrogen removal. Bioresource Technology 100, 4531-4534. Colliver B. B. and Stephenson T. (2000) Production of nitrogen oxide and dinitrogen oxide by autotrophic nitrifiers. Biotechnology Advances 18, 219-232. Dyreborg S. and Arvin E. (1995) Inhibition of nitrification by creosote-contaminated water. Water c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 6> Research 29, 1603-1606. Eilersen A. M., Henze M. and Kløft L. (1994) Effect of volatile fatty acids and trimethylamine on nitrification in activated sludge. Water Research 28, 1329-1336. Fux C., Velten S., Carozzi V., Solley D. and Keller J. (2006) Efficient and stable nitritation and denitritation of ammonium-rich sludge dewatering liquor using an SBR with continuous loading. Water Research 40, 2765-2775. Gomez J., Mendez R. and Lema J. M. (2000) Kinetic Study of Addition of Volatile Organic Compounds to a Nitrifying Sludge. Applied Biochemistry and Biotechnology 87, 189-202. Hanaki K., Wantawin C. and Ohgaki S. (1990) Effects of the activity of heterotrophs on nitrification in a suspended-growth reactor. Water Research 24, 289-296. Jenni S., J. M., Emmenegger L. and Udert K. M. Suitability of Clark-type microsensors for nitric oxide and nitrous oxide measurements in nitrogen removal processes with wastewater. In preparation. Kampschreur M. J., Tan N. C. G., Kleerebezem R., Picioreanu C., Jetten M. S. M. and Loosdrecht M. C. M. v. (2008a) Effect of Dynamic Process Conditions on Nitrogen Oxides Emission from a Nitrifying Culture. Environ. Sci. Technol. 42, 429-435. Kampschreur M. J., van der Star W. R. L., Wielders H. A., Mulder J. W., Jetten M. S. M. and van Loosdrecht M. C. M. (2008b) Dynamics of nitric oxide and nitrous oxide emission during full-scale reject water treatment. Water Research 42, 812-826. Kampschreur M. J., Poldermans R., Kleerbezem R., van der Star W. R. L., Haarhuis R., Abma W. R., Jetten M. S. M. and van Loosdrecht M. C. M. (2009) Emission of nitrous oxide and nitric ox-ide form a full-scale single-stage nitritation-anammox reactor. Water Science and Technology 60, 3211-3217. Larsen T. A. and Gujer W. (1997) The concept of sustainable wastewater management. Water Science and Technology 35, 3-10. Larsen T. A. and Lienert J. (2007) Novaquatis final report. NoMix - A new approach to urban wa-ter management. Eawag, 8600 Dübendorf, Switzerland. Larsen T. A., Maurer M., Udert K. M. and Lienert J. (2007) Nutrient cycles and ressource management: implications for choice of wastewater treatment technology. Water Science and Technology 55, 229-237. Larsen T. A., Peters I., Alder A., Eggen R., Maurer M. and Muncke J. (2001) Re-engineering the toilet for sustainable wastewater management. Environmental Science & Technology 35, 192A197A. Maurer M., Schwegler P. and Larsen T. A. (2003) Nutrients in urine: energetical aspects of re- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 7> moval and recovery. Water Science and Technology 48, 37-46. Morita M., Kudo N., Uemoto H., Watanabe A. and Shinozaki H. (2007) Protective Effect of Immo-bilized Ammonia Oxidizers and Phenol-degrading Bacteria on Nitrification in Ammoniaand Phenol-containing Wastewater. Engineering in Life Sciences 7, 587-592. Mulder A., van de Graaf A. A., Robertson L. A. and Kuenen J. G. (1995) Anaerobic ammonium oxidation discovered in a denitrifying fluidized bed reactor. FEMS Microbiology Ecology 16, 177-183. Murray R. E. and Knowles R. (2001) Influence of pH on production and consumption of NO by slurries of an agricultural soil under dentrifying conditions. Biology and Fertility of Soils 34, 357-362. Otterpohl R., Grottker M. and Lange J. (1997) Sustainable water and waste management in urban areas. Water Science and Technology 35, 121-133. Salzgeber D., Joss A. and Siegrist H. (2007) Autotrophe Schalmmwasserentstickung (Nitritation/Anammox) im SBR-Verfahren (Sequencing Batch Reactor). gwa 3, 205-209. Schertenleib R., Morel A., Kalbermatten J. and Saywell D. (2003) Guidelines for the implementation of the Bellagio-Principles and the houshold centred environmental sanitation approach (HCES). In Proceedings of teh 2nd International Ecosan Symposium. IWA, GTZ, Lübeck, Ger-many, pp 93100. Siegrist H., Reithaar S., Koch G. and Lais P. (1998) Nitrogen loss in a nitrifying rotating contactor treating ammonium-rich wastewater without organic carbon. Water Science and Technology 38, 241-248. Siegrist H., Salzgeber D., Eugster J. and Joss A. (2008) Anammox brings WWTP closer to energy autarky due to increased biogas production and reduced aeration energy for N-removal. Water Science and Technology 57, 383-388. Solomon S., Qin D., Manning M., Marquis M., Averyt K., Tignor M. M. B., Le Roy Miller J. H. and Chen Z. (2007) Climate Change 2007. The Physical Science Basis. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Cambridge University Press, New York. Strous M., Kuenen J. G. and Jetten M. S. M. (1999) Key Physiology of Anaerobic Ammonium Oxidation. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 65, 3248-3250. Texier A. C. and Gomez J. (2007) Simultaneous nitrification and p-cresol oxidation in a nitrifying sequencing batch reactor. Water Research 41, 315-322. Udert K. M., Larsen T. A. and Gujer W. (2003a) Biologically induced precipitation in urinecollecting systems. Water Science and Technology: Water Supply 3, 71-78. Udert K. M., Larsen T. A. and Gujer W. (2003b) Estimating the precipitation potential in urine- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 8> collecting systems. Water Research 37, 2667-2677. Udert K. M., Larsen T. A., Biebow M. and Gujer W. (2003c) Urea hydrolysis and precipitation dy-namics in a urine-collecting system. Water Research 37, 2571-2582. Udert K. M., Kind E., Teunissen M., Jenni S. and Larsen T. A. (2008) Effect of heterotrophic growth on nitritation/anammox in a single sequencing batch reactor. Water Science and Technology 58, 277-284. von Schulthess R. (1994a) Die Emission von Lachgas (N2O) in denitrifizierenden Belebungsanlagen. Dissertation, ETH Zürich. von Schulthess R., Wild D. and Gujer W. (1994b) Nitric and nitrous oxides from denitrifying acti-vated sludge at low oxygen concentration. Water Science and Technology 30, 123-132. Wilderer P. A. and Schreff D. (2000) Decentralized and centralized wastewater management : A challenge for technology developers. Water Science and Technology 41, 1-8. Xu Z.-Y., Zeng G.-M., Yang Z.-H., Xiao Y., Cao M., Sun H.-S., Ji L.-L. and Chen Y. (2010) Bio-logical treatment of landfill leachate with the integration of partial nitrification, anaerobic ammo-nium oxidation and heterotrophic denitrification. Bioresource Technology 101, 79-86.