  ISOCYCLE: Tracing the carbon and water cycle in terrestrial ecosystems with stable isotope spectroscopy 
ISOCYCLE aims to improve our understanding of carbon and water cycles in terrestrial ecosystems and their response to environmental changes. We employ novel laser  spectrometers for stable isotopes and combine field observations with manipulative drought experiments and process-based modeling.
ISOCYCLE - Tracing the Carbon and Water Cycle in Terrestrial Ecosystems with Stable Isotope Laser Spectroscopy Understanding the processes that control carbon and water flow through terrestrial ecosystems is essential both to estimate the current capacity of terrestrial ecosystems to absorb carbon from the atmosphere and to predict the ecosystems response under a changing climate. ISOCYCLE aims to improve our understanding of these processes and to elucidate how environmental changes and climatic extreme events alter carbon and water flows and their interaction. Stable isotopes of carbon and oxygen provide a powerful tool to trace the flow of carbon and water through ecosystems and to elucidate the interplay between various ecosystem compartments. So far, stable isotope research has been restricted to discontinuous field sampling due to laborious flask sampling and expensive lab analysis. In this project we employ newly developed laser based spectrometer for continuous stable carbon and oxygen isotope measurements in the field. Based on these measurements together with the eddy covariance technique and chamber systems we want to (a) quantify the stable carbon isotope budget of an ecosystem in the field, (b) trace the flow of carbon from the atmosphere through the plant to the soil via isotopes in natural abundance and isotope labeling, (c) link the carbon and water cycle at ecosystem level, and (d) study the impact of climatic extreme events, such as drought, on the carbon flow. Methodologically, we combine observational field work with manipulative drought experiments as well as process-based ecosystem modeling. The regional focus lies with grassland and forest ecosystems in Switzerland. ISOCYCLE is funded by the European Commission with a Marie Curie Excellence Grant forming a Marie Curie Team