  Computer-Assisted Shadowing in Non-Uniformly Hyperbolic Systems  
Using shadowing techniques and tools from interval arithmetic in connection with judiciously chosen numerically computed orbits we rigorously establish complicated dynamical behaviour for various dynamical systems including the restricted problem of three bodies. 
Numerically computed orbits of dynamical systems suffer from discretisation and round-off errors. Numerically generated orbits are almost orbits, however, so-called pseudo-orbits. For hyperbolic systems the so-called Shadowing Lemma asserts that in the vicinity of any pseudo-orbit there exists a true orbit of the system, the shadowing orbit. We construct a new type of hyperbolic sets. These sets consist of, say, two "hyperbolic periodic pseudo-orbits". Assume that at some point the two pseudo-orbits are delta-close. Then we obtain uncountably many delta-pseudo orbits by arbitrarily combining the two periodic orbits. If delta is small enough (compared to the "degree of hyperbolicity" of the periodic pseudo-orbits), using the shadowing property, the shift map can be embedded. The implementation of this scheme (and variations of it) is usually computer-assisted. Several examples are treated including the logistic map, the Hénon map and the restricted problem of three bodies. For details see: - D. Stoffer, K. Palmer: Rigorous verification of Chaotic Behaviour of Maps using Validated shadowing, Nonlinearity 12 (1999), 1683-1698 - U. Kirchgraber, U. Manz, D. Stoffer: Rigorous Proof of Chaotic Behaviour in a Dumbbell Satellite Model, J. Math. Anal. & Appl. 251 (2000), 897-911 - D. Stoffer, U. Kirchgraber: Verification of Chaotic Behaviour in the Planar Restricted Three Body Problem, Applied Numerical Mathematics 39 (2001), 415-433 -U. Kirchgraber, D. Stoffer: Possible chaotic motion of comets in the Sun-Jupiter system - a computer-assisted approach based on shadowing, Nonlinearity 17 (2004), 281-300. -U. Kirchgraber, D. Stoffer: Transversal homoclinic points of the Hénon map, Annali di Matematica Pura ed Applicata 185 Supplement 5 (2006), 187-204.