  Rheology of supercooled liquids: multiscale simulations guided by nonequilibrium thermodynamics  
Specially designed multiscale simulations are used in order to study rheological behavior of supercooled liquids. Founded on a nonequilibrium statistical thermodynamics framework, these simulations allow to establish a microscopically founded constitutive model for these systems. 
The nature of glass and the glass transition is arguably one of the deepest and most interesting unsolved problems in condensed matter physics. Since many soft matter systems (like e.g. colloids, dense emulsions, foams, pastes slurries, etc.) show rheological properties that are quite similar to those of supercooled liquids, understanding glassy behavior would have far reaching consequences also for soft matter and material science in general. Potentially, glassy rheological behavior can have a significant impact also in biophysics, since a wide variety of living cell types and F-actin solutions can be considered as soft glassy materials existing close to a glass transition. The overall goal of the proposed research project is to use extensive, multiscale simulations in order to determine the static and dynamic building blocks for a macroscopic, constitutive theory that is able to quantitatively describe nonequilibrium dynamical phenomena and rheology of glassy systems like supercooled liquids and soft matter. Such a constitutive theory would on the one hand improve our theoretical understanding of glassy systems enormously as it allows to identify the universal features that can be described in terms of the chosen collective variables only. On the other hand, such a constitutive model would also be extremely useful for many applications as it would allow a much faster and easier prediction of flow properties. In particular, our approach is based on nonequilibrium thermodynamics with a very clear distinction between static and dynamic building blocks. Therefore, we will be able to investigate the existence of a static correlation length that is growing upon approaching the glass transition and which is considered to be the missing link between static and dynamical properties in glasses. The simulation of glassy systems is notoriously difficult due to the extremely long relaxation times appearing near the glass transition. In addition, it should be noted that brute-force NEMD simulations are still limited to unrealistic high flow rates due to the huge time- scale gap between microscopic dynamics and macroscopic behavior. This dramatic timeUscale gap is the key motivation for multiscale simulation not only in soft matter but also in hard condensed matter systems. Therefore, we want to make use of the systematic and thermodynamically consistent timeUscale bridging algorithm that we developed recently. We start with standard microscopic models for glass formers subject to imposed flow conditions. The timeUscale bridging algorithm involves computer simulations that are guided by nonequilibrium thermodynamics and targeted so as to extract static and dynamic building blocks for a macroscopic, constitutive theory. Motivated by our recent results, we plan to choose the pair correlation function of inherent structures as the relevant collective variable. This original choice for a coarse-grained level of description opens a new perspective on the glass problem and leads to different kinds of constitutive models compared to those existing in the literature so far. For this purpose, we will adapt the hybrid simulation scheme that we developed recently, where Monte-Carlo and molecular dynamics simulations are combined in a thermodynamically consistent manner.