  Optimal Design of Optical Nano Antennas  
Optical nano antennas are very promising nano structures, which may be used for optical data communication and chemical and biological sensor applications. In this project, we develop appropriate numerical methods to simulate and optimize such antennas. 
The rapid development of micro- and nano-technology allows the fabrication of nanostructures with increasing complexity, sophistication and functionality. This opens the door to innovative concepts of miniaturized devices with promising potential applications. In particular, the interaction of extremely small levels of electromagnetic energy with nanostructures can create pronounced effects, which become therefore measurable. This can be exploited to foster progress in domains such as optical communication, sensing, and microscopy. Among many potential practical applications, the following can be mentioned: Controlling and focusing the light emission of lasers and optical components, guiding optical waves through extremely compact structures, detecting visible light with polarization and wavelength selectivity, identifying single biological or chemical molecules, probing surfaces with atomic accuracy, etc. The general concept of electromagnetic field enhancement at optical frequencies through the use of nanostructures with dimensions smaller than a wavelength up to a few wavelengths can be described through the generic name of "nano antennas", in reference to their counterparts at radio frequency. Although Maxwell theory provides the main equations for the analysis of both optical and radio frequency antennas, the analysis and design of optical nano antennas is much more demanding mainly because of the highly dispersive and lossy behavior of metals at optical frequencies. While this causes problems in the implementation of field solvers for appropriate numerical studies of nano antennas, one can take advantage of specific physical mechanisms denoted as plasmon resonances that occur at optical frequencies. While powerful commercial and scientific codes are available for the efficient analysis and optimal design of radio frequency antennas, no such codes are currently available for optical antennas. that may strongly enhance the performance of nano anThe exploitation of plasmonic effects U can be based on physical comprehension and empirical concepts. However, the high tennas U complexity and cost of the involved technologies puts limits to the probing of novel concepts, as wells as to the optimization of designs and combination of materials. In this sense, computer simulations of electromagnetic effects at the nano-scale are indispensable and provide a cost-effective approach to accelerate the development of nano antennas. Furthermore, through numerical analysis and subsequent visualization of the results (field amplitude, power density), the understanding of the most significant design parameters can be enhanced. During the last decades, the advances of computers and numerical techniques have steadily increased the capability of electromagnetic modeling tools. Nowadays, the design of radio frequency and microwave devices is based largely on the use of simulation software. However, even if an impressive accuracy is achieved in the design of conventional electronic devices and systems, computational tools are quite limited in their ability to provide reliable electromagnetic simulations of nano antennas. The reason for this unsatisfying result is that nano-structures set very specific requirements on the applied electromagnetic analysis tools: Among the most critical aspects, the treatment of highly lossy and dispersive materials (in particular metals) and the flexibility of the geometrical discretization (in particular conformal meshing and multi-scaling) should be mentioned. Because of plasmon resonances, the selection of the metals for constructing optical antennas is crucial, i.e., during the design process one does not only specify the geometrical parameters (as for radio frequency antennas) but one also must find an appropriate metal or a composite of different metals. This considerably widens the search space for the optimal design. As a result, established design procedures for radio frequency antennas may not be applied and must be replaced by extensive c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> numerical optimizations. The proposed project supports current efforts devoted to the fabrication of nano antennas (in several collaborating groups) through the development of novel electromagnetic analysis and optimization tools. The project builds on the different tools presently implemented at IFH (e.g. frequency MMP, time-domain U FVTD) with major expansions planned towards efficient simuladomain U tions of optical antennas, which may finally be combined with numerical optimizers (e.g. genetic algorithms and evolutionary strategies). A rigorous process of cross-validation and comparison to empirical data will consolidate the connection to practical applications. The combination of the field solvers with efficient optimizing algorithms will exploit the available computing power to the fullest. This will allow us to find and propose optical nano antenna structures that may be tailored towards specific applications outperforming existing antennas by orders of magnitude. The project is expected to have significant impact on other nano scale devices. Several collaborating groups who focus on more technology-oriented nano scale research will benefit significantly from better modeling capabilities. More generally, progresses in electromagnetic simulation tools will assist analysis, design and optimization of increasingly sophisticated devices from radio to optical frequencies.