  The CIP Method: Component- and Model-Based Construction of Embedded Systems  

 CIP (Communicating Interacting Processes) is a model-based software development method for embedded systems. The problem of constructing an embedded system is decomposed into a functional and a connection problem. The functional problem is solved by constructing a formal reactive behavioural model. A CIP model consists of concurrent clusters of synchronously cooperating extended state finite machines. The construction of CIP models is supported by the CIP Tool, a graphical modelling framework with code generators that transform CIP models into concurrently executable CIP components. The connection problem consists of connecting generated CIP components to the real environment. This problem is solved by means of techniques and tools adapted to the technology of the interface devices. Construction of a CIP model starts from the behaviour of the processes of the real environment, leading in constructive steps to an operational specification of the system behaviour. This approach allows stable interfaces of CIP components to be specified at an early stage, thus supporting concurrent development of their connection to the environment. The method and its tool have proven their potential both in industry projects and in ETH courses for some years now. The CIP System AG spin off company moved its premises to the Zürich Technopark, allowing for much better relations to existing and potential industrial users. Current research concerns formal verification of behavioural properties. CIP model-checking aims at making a significant step towards provably well-behaved systems by adequate support of the design and development process. The new approach allows to validate executable models of system behaviour by automated checking for specific properties. The developer is aided in formally specifying these properties through mechanisms and tools allowing to select specific items from a choice presented to the user, thus relieving him to some extent from mastering difficult mathematical notations.