  Physics of Optical Waveguide Switches  

Electro-optical waveguide switches and modulators are key components for the signal processing  in today's fibre communication technology. III-V semiconductor materials are well suited for integration of optical and electronic components such as lasers, optical amplifiers, detectors and heterojunction bipolar transistors. At our institute we develop integrated Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI) switches operating with TE and TM polarization. Incoming light is distributed into the two arms of the MZI with a multi mode interference (MMI) coupler, propagated through the different paths and finally recombined using a second MMI coupler. Application of a reverse bias to one of the light paths changes the effective refractive index of that rib waveguide. The light is switched using the resulting phase change to obtain constructive or destructive interferences. Different physical effects produce electrically-controlled index changes. We use a combination of Pockels and Franz-Keldysh effects. Phase-shifting waveguides are oriented such that polarization dependencies of above effects cancel. The bandgap can be selected by different compositions of the InGaAsP material system. Largest index variations are obtained for operating wavelengths (1.3 or 1.55 micron) close to the bandgap of the material. Operating with wavelengths too close to the bandgap gives high refractiveindex changes and therefore low switching voltages, but also electro-absorption at high electrical fields. The switching voltages needed for the MZI switch are 3-9V for distances between band gap and operating wavelength. With the measured switching voltages we calculated the quadratic electro-optic coefficient. Wavelengths too far away from the bandgap result in unnecessary high switching voltages, whereas optimized operation allows moderate switching voltages with no electro-absorption. The material composition with the bandgap at 1.3 \gmm has been chosen such as to obtain optimal operation in the 1.5 micron window of fiber optical systems.