  Explaining Spatial and Temporal Dynamics in Climate Change Policy Making  
The proposed project will develop explanatory models that account for temporal and spatial variation in climate change policy outputs (i.e., specific policy choices) in advanced industrialized countries since 1995. 
The proposed project will develop explanatory models that account for temporal and spatial variation in climate change policy outputs (i.e., specific policy choices) in advanced industrialized countries since 1995. These models will explain countriesS policy choices with respect to climate change mitigation efforts in terms of (1) domestic factors, such as public demand, and political and economic characteristics of countries, (2) systemic factors such as membership in international organizations, and (3) processes of policy diffusion. The project will fill several important gaps in the existing literature on domestic climate change policy making and environmental politics in general. First, at the theoretical level, we combine domestic level explanations with processes of international policy diffusion. We argue that democratic structures and processes, such as the type of government and the electoral system, as well as public demand determine the enactment of climate change policies. In addition, we posit that entanglement in international organizations and transnational policy diffusion processes further enhance the adoption of climate change policies. Hence, we study how domestic and international factors matter for and interact with each other in climate change policy making. Second, to test our theoretical arguments, we construct a new times-series cross-sectional data set on climate change policy outputs in advanced industrialized (Annex I) countries since 1995. Existing large-N data for climate change policy outputs are rather crude and mainly cross-sectional, which points to the need for better large-N panel data of this kind. By using IEA, OECD, and EU databases, country reports to the UNFCCC, and information from national environmental and energy agencies, we will code whether and when Annex I advanced industrialized countries have adopted specific climate policy measures (e.g., taxes, subsidies, or regulatory restrictions) in specific sectors (e.g., energy production, housing, or industry). These new data will allow us to test the empirical relevance of explanatory models also across different types of climate policy measures. Third, existing empirical studies of environmental policies and climate policy in particular suffer from insufficient data on public demand. We will develop a new data set on public demand for climate change mitigation in Annex I industrialized countries, using news media sources. This allows us to examine how public demand interacts with domestic political institutions (i.e., the supply side) in influencing climate change policy making. We expect the results of this project to have considerable policy relevance. In comparison to existing data sets and studies on climate change policy outputs, our data and explanatory models will offer a more dynamic, and thus improved understanding of which countries are the frontrunners or the laggards in climate change policy making in general and with respect to specific policy measures, and why.