  Security in the Information Age  
In this project, we mainly focus on the role of the state in defending against cyber-threats and in securing the information age. We investigate how the state can regain its authority in the field of information technologies, but also how state is adapting to the challenges of the information age. 
The marriage of computers and telecommunications, the integration of these technologies into a reach, and the fact that they are available at multimedia system of communication that has Sglobal ¸ T low cost seem to be bringing about a fundamental transformation in the way humans communicate and interact. But however much consensus there may be on the growing importance of information and communication technologies (ICT) today, agreement is far more elusive when it comes to pinning down the impact of this development on security or other issues. Security in the information age is closely connected to the new vulnerabilities arising from the application of ICT to nearly the whole spectrum of political and societal undertakings. These vul the individual, private, nerabilities may arise from the whole range of (newly) empowered actors U corporate, commercial, and political, governmental and intergovernmental, inter- and transnational and apply to these actors. The new vulnerabilities include the wide array of technologientities U cal applications on the one hand, and the potentially destabilizing societal implications thereof on the other. In this project, we mainly focus on the role of the state in defending against cyber-threats and in securing the information age. We investigate how the state can regain its authority in the field of information technologies, but also how state is adapting to the challenges of the information age. Therefore, we look at offensive activities, such as information warfare, cyber-crime, or cyberterrorism; and defensive activities, such as information assurance or critical information infrastructure protection (CIIP). Special attention is given to the role of the state as an information-age provider of security that faces a number of immediate problems and is challenged to operate in unfamiliar ways. Additionally, emerging features of information societies and ICT-related threats are identified, and reasons for the emergence, nature, and consequences of information-age security issues are discussed.