  Object Recognition for the Internet of Things 
This is a joint project between the partners ETH Zurich and kooaba. The goal of this project is to extend the abilities of the existing Software in scalability and breath of application.
KooabaSs core technology was developed at ETH and is able to recognise specific objects from images reliably. Products, which facilitate the hyperlinking of print media (newspapers, magazines) and movie posters, are already being sold by kooaba. Kooaba generates income from advertising banners and sales of products from affiliates, which are presented on the mobile webpage returned to the user. The goal is to extend this technology with the following research topics: where millions of objects of any kind could be To achieve the vision of Sa ¸ hyperlinked worldT several additional scientific and technological projects need to be completed: Shyperlinked ¸ T, 1) System for Large Scale Deployment of Nearest Neighbour Search (technological objective) kooabaSs image recognition technology is based on the SURF features [1]. Each feature consists of a high dimensional feature vector (64 dimensions). Searching for matching images in a database, thus comes down to nearest neighbour search in this high-dimensional space. However, the problem of efficient nearest neighbour search in large databases (millions of images, up to billions of features) is computationally demanding and difficult in theory. Many methods to ease this task have been suggested in the scientific literature, but little is known about their behaviour in large-scale parallelised systems. Thus, this task consists of implementing 3 known algorithms as a baseline system for scalable search. This objective also requires evaluation of existing cluster deployment and development of a custom clustered recognition server. (A single machine recognition server has already been developed by kooaba). Furthermore, this objective also includes evaluation of services such as the amazon.com C2 service, regarding complexity, cost Scomputing ¸ on demandT and reliability. 2) Evaluation and Design of Algorithms for Efficient Nearest Neighbour Search in High Dimensional Spaces (scientific objective) As mentioned in the previous section, the problem of efficient nearest neighbour search in large databases is still not completely solved. Building on the baseline methods and the server software developed in task 1), the objective in this task is to compare different recent methods for scaleable nearest neighbour search in a scientific manner. The goal to find the best approach for our purpose and to further adapt them to our problem, for instance exploiting the specific characteristics of the SURF features. For approximate methods, which scale to higher number of images, the loss in precision shall be measured quantitatively and methods designed, which overcome this loss, for instance by introducing redundancy and parallelisation, or by a hybrid method consisting of a combination of several existing methods. The resulting algorithms should allow object recognition from millions of reference images faster and applicable on large databases. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> 3) Classifier for recognition of specific marker types and text (scientific-technological) A third topic is the expansion of our system to discriminate and recognise two special classes of or patterns, namely barcodes and written URLs. That is, a system shall be developed, Sobjects ¸ T which analyses an incoming image in several steps: First, a classifier (from machine learning methods, for instance SVM [2], Boosted cascade of weak classifiers [3]) is applied to the incoming query image, which detects if any of the special marker types (1-d barcodes, 2-d barcodes, text) is present and, if yes, returns the section of the image with the rectified content. This requires development of a method for classification and detection as well as rectification of the content after detection, and is thus a scientific objective. If such an entity has been found, the corresponding decoder (i.e. barcode decoder library or Optical Character Recognition - OCR - library) needs to be applied. There are sufficient Sout-of-the-box ¸ T solutions available to this problem, both open-source and commercial. Thus, integrating these elements is a technological objective. It is important to mention, that the whole process will happen on the server side, i.e. the enduser can just upload any image to our recognition system, containing text, barcodes, or any other object from a thin client on the mobile phone. This is an important discrimination factor against competing methods, which often rely on processing on the mobile phone. With our server side processing, we can add additional code types and features any time, without updating client software. The more difficult barcode recognition on the server side (received image can be very noisy) we try to overcome with the sophisticated detection mentioned above. From the business point of view, this would allow kooaba to jump far ahead of the competition, in that it allows to recognise any kind of marker (barcodes, text) or object (existing system) all in one system. To date, no comparable solution exists. 4) Media Search Platform (technological objective) of print media (magazines, newspapers) and movie pokooaba currently offers Shyperlinking ¸ T sters. The former requires individual projects with media companies, the latter is independent of those and works similar like a search engine: users can take a picture of any movie poster and are redirected to a mobile web-site which contains relevant content obtained from kooabaSs partners. The objective here is to extend this approach to all kinds of media, namely DVD covers, CD covers, book covers etc. Technically, this means developing a mobile web portal which offers relevant content, building partnerships with clients and interfacing to their systems, programming a content management platform, and last but not least interfacing this platform with our recognition server. 5) Integration of geographic information, user generated content, and automated mapping to a c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> textual query (scientific objective) is the collection of a database A major challenge for a system, which Shyperlinks ¸ the worldT of objects and their descriptions. While this task is easily solvable for products such as movie posters, DVD covers by querying the APISs of Internet portals such as Amazon, it is much harder for objects such as tourist sights. However, very recent trends involving so-called Suser ¸ generated contentT have led to vast collections of usable data on the Internet. Namely two sources are suited for our purposes: Wikipedia and Flickr. Well known Wikipedia is an on-line Encyclopedia, created and maintained by also tourist sights. Flickr on the other itSs users and covering nearly every imaginable topic U hand, is the largest photo sharing web site in the world. Users upload photos and annotate them with keywords and - very recently - also with their geographic location (Sgeotagging Each (so called Stags ¸ T) ¸ T). month this number is expected to increase more than 2 million additional photos are being geotagged U rapidly in the coming years when mobile phones and cameras with integrated GPS system will be widely available. The figure below shows images from Flickr tagged with the word SGrossmuen¸ sterT on a map of Zurich. This development will allow us to tap and combine these databases to build a hyperlinked world: when a user sends a picture to our system, the geographic location is delivered with the query image. The system instantly collects images from the same geographic area from Flickr. (The API on Flickr for this task is available). The system tries to match the query image to the candidates from Flickr. Note, that this restriction to a certain area limits our nearest neighbour search problem to a smaller database (only thousand of objects at most) and is thus easily solvable. The resulting set of putative matching images is further filtered by cross matching and 3D geometry constraints. Next, the textual descriptions (tags and titles) of the remaining images are analyzed and the most probable textual description of the query is derived. That is, the userSs image query has now been transformed into a text query. This query is sent to Wikipedia, and the best matching article is returned as a response to the user. In fact, the data on Wikipedia allows to verify the proposed textual description derived from Flickr: since Wikipedia contains information such as images and locations for many articles, this data can be matched back to Flickr or the original user query to verify the proposed result. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 4> 6) Community platform (technological objective) With the insights from the previous objectives, kooaba wants to build a community platform in the Internet, where users can hyperlink objects themselves. This builds on the scalability of objective 2) and the results of objective 4). Users will namely be able to hyperlink, rate, and comment locations such as bars, restaurants, or tourist sights.