  Distributed Flight Array 
The Distributed Flight Array consists of individual vehicles that are capa-  ble of assembling, coordinating, and taking flight. The vehicles will hover in the air until they run out of power. At which point, they will break apart and fall back to the ground before beginning the process all over again.
The Distributed Flight Array (DFA) consists of individual vehicles that are able to drive autonomously and assemble with their peers on the ground. Each vehicle can generate enough thrust using a single fixed-pitch propeller to lift itself into the air, but is unstable in flight. Not until they are joined do these relatively simple vehicles evolve into a sophisticated multi-propeller system capable of coordinated flight, see Graphic 1. The goal is to have many vehicles assemble at random, fly to a predetermined altitude, hover, break apart, fall back down, and repeat the cycle, see Graphic 2. The design challenges of the DFA mirror those of modular reconfigurable robots [1] and micro aerial vehicles [2], which include electromechanical interconnection, inter-vehicle communication, and energy storage. Each DFA vehicle is a self-contained unit, resembling a hexagon with protruding features designed for passive alignment and docking, with onboard power, sensors, a computer, drive motors, and a flight motor, see Graphic 3. Once docked together, vehicles are able to exchange sensory information with their neighbors via infrared communication to construct an estimate the systemSs state. The dynamics of the airborne DFA are quite rich. Each vehicle can essentially provide two coupled forces/torques: the thrust created by the propeller, and the associated torque due to the imparted rotational flow and change in angular momentum. Each vehicle, on its own, is thus quite unstable. A four vehicle configuration, however, can be stabilized with the appropriate use of feedback control, see Graphics 4. The nominal torque about an equilibrium flight condition can be made zero if two of the vehicles have clockwise spinning propellers, and the other two counterclockwise spinning propellers. Yaw control can be achieved by changing the relative speeds of the clockwise and counterclockwise propellers. Pitch control can be achieved by speeding up one of the counterclockwise propellers and slowing down the other counterclockwise propeller; similarly for roll control and the clockwise propellers. Finally, the overall thrust can be controlled by changing the speeds of the propellers in unison. When more than four vehicles are used to form a DFA, the system becomes an over-actuated one, leading to some interesting questions on how resources should be optimally used in a distributed environment. Future challenges will include determining the minimum amount of sensed information that must be shared, if any. Similarly, a goal will be to quantify the minimum amount of control information that must be shared for coordination purposes. The interconnection topology of the structure will not be fixed a-priori. An additional challenge will be to come up with a strategy that will enable vehicles to easily find and dock with one another using as little sensory information as possible [3]. Since the vehicles will be able to share information when docked, it will be interesting to quantitatively determine what the benefits are in c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> constructing the array. The DFA is an abstract test-bed featuring rich dynamics and challenging design problems. It is a platform for research topics in the field of control engineering, and will undoubtedly be an eyecatching pedagogical showpiece for distributed estimation and control. M. Yim, W.-M. Shen, B. Salemi, D. Rus, M. Moll, H. Lipson, E. Klavins, and G. Chirikjian, SMo¸ IEEE Robotics and dular Self-Reconfigurable Robot Systems [Grand Challenges of Robotics],T 52, March 2007. Automation Magazine, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 43 U S. Bouabdallah, M. Becker, and R. Siegwart, SAutonomous ¸ Miniature Flying Robots: Coming Research, Development, and Results,T IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine, vol. 14, Soon! U 89, Sept. 2007. no. 3, pp. 88 U J. Bishop, S. Burden, E. Klavins, R. Kreisberg, W. Malone, N. Napp, and T. Nguyen, SProgramma¸ in Proceedings ble Parts: A Demonstration of the Grammatical Approach to Self-Organization,T 3691, 2005. of IEEE Intelligent Robots and Systems Conference, pp. 3684 U