  CiVi.net - Effectiveness and efficiency of ecosystem management instruments  
The CiVi.net project, a cooperation between 3 universities and 4 NGOs from Europe and Latin America, aims to analyse, transfer and disseminate successful and sustainable community based solutions with regard to ecosystem service management in Latin America.
Total Project: The CiVi.net project aims to analyse, transfer and disseminate successful and sustainable community based solutions with regard to ecosystem service management in Latin America. The main focus is placed on institutional settings in terms of original rules and related governance models which help to prevent and resolve tensions arising from a necessary new repartition and use of natural resources. Thereby, the role of civil society organisations (CSOs) within these governance models is in the core of the research. To meet these challenges, CiVi.net takes an action research and case study approach. The project has chosen four case study regions in Brazil and Costa Rica where successful solutions have been worked out. These will be analysed with respect to the following questions: - What kinds of management instruments are used to solve environmental problems and how effective are they? - What kinds of original rules and institutional arrangements are implemented and which economic governance models have been established? - What crucial aspects must be considered when transferring these solutions to other communities c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> that face similar problems? - What is the capacity of CSOs and their networks for contributing to finding, implementing and transferring such solutions? Based on the findings, CiVi.net wants to facilitate the transfer of successful solutions to at least one other community for each selected case study region confronted with similar environmental challenges. To do so, CiVi.net will develop an ex-ante assessment approach to test the transferability of institutional solutions and of successful governance models. One of the final outputs will be a manual to assist practitioners and scientists on how to design and manage the knowledge transfer. CiVi.net will put much emphasis on the dissemination of the produced knowledge. Thus, another of its final outputs will be an innovative web-based data portal for providing and trading knowledge. Primary Subtasts managed by ETH Zurich: - Analyse the approaches taken in the case study regions to deal with environmental problems with respect to the employed management instruments, including positive financial incentives such as payments for ecosystem services (PES) Task 1: Perform a first screening of the employed management instruments in the pre-chosen four case study regions In a first step, ETH, supported by all case study partners (i.e. EI, NEO and FUNDAG) will do a first screening of the management instruments that are employed in the four pre-chosen case study regions to handle the environmental problems faced in the local communities there. The analysis will include the following aspects: a) How are the management instruments designed? b) How many approaches use financial incentives to spur sustainable use of common resources at the community level? c) Do the instruments include payments from non-users of the resource for the supply of positive externalities such as ES? Task 2: Analyse the different management instruments with respect to their effectiveness and efficiency In this task, ETH, with the help of the case study partners and ZALF, will analyse the different management instrument in regard of the following issues: a) What is the environmental effectiveness of the analysed instruments? b) What are their effects on additionality, permanence and leakage regarding conservation efforts? c) What do they cost and how efficient is the money used? d) How is the money raised? Task 3: Discuss their applicability and suitability against the new settings (bio-physical, socioeconomic/political) in the possible transfer regions c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> ETH, in cooperation with the case study partners, will discuss the transfer and relocation potential of the different management instruments in view of the changed conditions in the transfer regions. Thereby, the following aspects will be in the focus of the analysis: a) In what respect do the bio-physical, socio-economic conditions differ between the original case study regions and their transfer regions? b) Can a comparable effectiveness be reached in the transfer regions under the changed frame conditions? c) How can the costs be covered in the transfer region, and for what time horizon? d) Which aspects of the instruments are likely to require adaptations to work in the transfer regions? Based on the outcomes of tasks 4.3 ETH will elaborate specific recommendations for the transfer regions. Task 4: Prepare and conduct an experimental workshop using methods from behavioural developmental economics to test the transfer potential of management instruments (for one or two transfer regions) The experiment will help to investigate possible obstacles that could hinder successful relocation and transfer of approaches to the transfer regions. It allows to compare different management instruments empirically without actually implementing them and simulate the mid- and long term development of the behavioural responses to the incentives created by each instrument. The experiments will be conducted for at least one (maximal two) of the transfer regions. For the preparation and implementation of the experiments, ETH will closely cooperate with the case study partners in the selected transfer regions. Task 5: Elaborate analytical framework with respect to the transfer and relocation potential of different management instruments and how this affects their effectiveness and efficiency Based on the outcomes of tasks 1 to 4, ETH will work out general guidelines for the transfer and relocation potential of different management instruments which will be documented in the final report of WP4. The final report will form part A of the analytical framework of the project.