  Evigem The European Virtual Institute of Geometry Measurement provides valuable services in the field of geometry measurement and offers a high-quality network of experts  
EVIGeM is a commercial net of European partner organisations, suppliers, vendors and manufacturers of metrology instruments, users, research institutes, calibration centres and individual experts. 
EVIGeM consists of five thematic groups, each represented by one keypartner: Gear Metrology, Bremen Institute of Industrial Technology and Applied Work Science at the University of Bremen (DE); Surface and Nanotechnology, Mahr GmbH (DE); Form and Position Measurement, Engineering Office Dr. W. Knapp (CH); Coordinate Measuring Machines (CMM), UnimetrikMetrology and Calibration Services (ES); Geometry Measurement for Medicine, The Institute for Health and Consumer Protection of the European CommissionSs Joint Research Centres. Goals of EVIGeM The main goal of EVIGeM is to recover, maintain and advance Europe's position in geometry measurements, comprising instrumentation (hardware and software), scientific knowledge and methodology. Services EVIGeM will offer services on two different levels - a customer and a member level. On the customer level, EVIGeM aims at being the first contact for a customer dealing with a specific problem in the field of geometry measurement and to mediate solution providers. The providers to be considered are members of EVIGeM. They use the Virtual Institute on the members level to offer solutions to the problem descriptions of the customers (inquiries). Services on the customer level - Calibration of metrological instrumentation - Calibration of standards and workpieces - Measurements - Consultation - Feasibility studies - Demonstrations - Partnership, collaboration - Workshops, seminars, tutorials - Support on buying metrological products - Support on selling metrological products Services on the member level - Free access to the knowledge base - Client database (qualifications, expertise) - Future market, trend analysis, studies - Market studies - State of the art knowledge - Quality management - Contribution to standardisation - Communication layer - Shared workspace - Project management and coordination c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2>