  Reference groups as constraints and enablers in individual careers  
We aim to study supportive, normative and comparative influences of reference groups and to explore the impact of a broader set of referents, including abstract social categories and occupational communities, in the construction of individual career identities and specific career trajectories. 
In much of older career literature, the employing organization is considered to be the dominant social context in which careers unfold, while "new" models of career like the protean and boundaryless career point to the necessity to consider a much larger array of possibly relevant contexts. However, in recent career research usually organization-led careers have been contrasted with selfdirected careers, thereby applying a rather restricted perspective on the multifaceted relationships between individuals and the surrounding social systems. This may be partly due to the fact that newer career concepts have postulated a growing need for personal agency in overcoming structural constraints, especially organizational and occupational boundaries. As a consequence, research has focused more on the individual than on contextual factors. In order to develop a more balanced perspective the impact of social reference groups needs to be better understood, both as social drivers of agentic behavior and as social constraints that, for instance, reduce the permeability of career boundaries. In the proposed project we aim to systematically study supportive, normative and comparative influences of reference groups - including also possible negative influences, such as creating and maintaining boundaries that limit career mobility - and to explore the impact of a broader set of referents, including abstract social categories and occupational communities, in the construction of individual career identities and specific career trajectories. We will build on and expand the data obtained in our previous SNF-project1. Semi-structured interviews with a subgroup from our survey sample of 610 alumni and students from ten management education programs in Switzerland will permit to further explore the dynamics underlying the individual career histories, personal social networks and career assessments reported on in the survey. Sequence analysis will be used to identify general career patterns and factors underlying these patterns. Especially, we are interested in the impact of industry- and occupation-specific boundaries on individual career trajectories. Each half-year segment of the individual career histories will be coded according to hierarchical level, occupation, industry sector, and geographic region. Per time segment, unemployment rates for occupation, industry sector, and region will be added. Information on education requirements and educational diversity per occupation will also be included. Because our sample represents a mix of university level and university of applied sciences alumni with very different educational backgrounds, further comparisons of influencing factors embedded in different educational trajectories will be possible. By addressing both micro-level processes embedded in individual constructions of career identity and macro-level processes creating structural career boundaries within the common framework of reference group influences a fuller understanding of individual career trajectories will be developed. By shedding light on the broad variety of supportive, normative and comparative influences of personal networks, role models and occupational communities, a detailed picture of enabling and constraining forces acting on people's career related aspirations, assessments and decisions will emerge. These findings may also inform the design of further education programs, individual and organizational career management, and even labor policy more generally.