  Mountland II; Sustainable land-use practices in mountain regions: Integrative analysis of ecosystem dynamics under global change, socio-economic impacts and policy implications  
Current land-use in the regions of Davos, Jura (Vaud) and Visp (Valais) is investigated. Afterwards changes in land-use are simulated until 2100 using a spatial explicit landuse model based on linear programming. Sensitivity analyses concerning commoditiy markets and climate change are carried out.
Mountain ecosystems provide a large array of goods and services, which are highly sensitive to changes of climate and land use. The primary goal of the project MOUNTLAND is to contribute to the development of adapted land use practices for mountain regions that (i) warrant the life-supporting services required for sustainable development, and (ii) are economically and eco of global logically efficient, and socially and politically feasible. Existing Simpact ¸ assessmentsT change on ecosystems and society have largely focused on the one-directional impacts from climate change to ecosystems and on to socio-economic and policy implications. Mountland moves beyond this by (i) considering changes in both climate and land use simultaneously, and (ii) explicitly considering feedback effects from changing socio-economic and political conditions to land use and adaptation to climate change. As can be seen in the attached graphic (Tasks within the concept of Mountland) the project is splitted up into 3 tasks: Task 1 is mainly dealing with changes in ecosystems caused by climate change, task 2 is dealing with the economical consequences of the changes of the ecosystems, and task 3 develops policy solutions to mitigate the consequences of climate change on the provision of ecosystem services. In task 2 we assess the expected changes with respect to the economic value of ecosystem goods and services under different climate and land-use scenarios based on the modeling outcomes of task 1. In order to do this we build up a land-use model for the regions of Davos, Jura and Visp. This model will be a spatial explicit farm sample model based on linear programming. Using the scenarios (climate, market) built up together with our project partners we then simulate land-use in these regions until 2100. Using the land-use model we afterwards analyze the cost-effective provision of ecosystem goods and services by mountain agriculture and forestry under future climate and socio-economic conditions.