  Solar Lunar Spectrometer for Atmospheric Research (SOLUSAR)  
Many microwave based geodetic and radioastronomic remote sensing techniques are in need of reliable information on the local tropospheric water vapor abundance. SOLUSAR is a prototype spectroscopic instrument to accurately determine the water vapor content by analyzing absorption in sun/moon light.
Various geodetic and radioastronomical applications such as GNSS, Satellite Altimetry or VLBI are microwave based. As the radio signals are passing the atmosphere they are considerably delayed due to refraction. The effect induced by the troposphere can be divided in a hydrostatic and a non-hydrostatic part (caused by water vapor). Because of the highly variable spatial and temporal distribution of water vapor in the earths's atmosphere the latter cannot be modelled accurately enough. Therefore a highly precise instrumental determination of the water vapor content is essential. Solar spectrometers measuring the absorption of incident sun light at infrared frequencies use the principle of DDifferential Optical Absorption SpectrospyS ¸ (DOAS) to retrieve the precipitable water vapor. They form excellent validation tools for different retrieval methods because of their methodological independence, accuracy and selfcalibration ability. Based on the experience with previously built solar spectrometers a new prototype SOlar LUnar Spectrometer for Atmospheric Research (SOLUSAR) has been developed in a joint project of the Geodesy and Geodynamics Laboratory (GGL) of ETH Zurich, the Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften (ISAS), Berlin and the Geoforschungszentrum Potsdam (GFZ). A new optical layout and improved sensor technology yields the possibility of sunlight measurements under low level radiation conditions and nightime measurements by analyzing light reflected by the moon, though with reduced accuracy and temporal resolution as in case of solar measurements. Comparison measurements of to identically built prototypes and validation measurements using co-located GPS meteorology show considerable biases of the methodology, e.g., due to stray light, which have to be assessed more closely.