  Novel measuring techniques for single and two-phase flows  
Wire-mesh sensors and liquid film sensors are developed for high-resolving measurements in gas-liquid flows as well as for the measurement of concentration fields and velocities in single phase flows. A miniaturized thermoconductive probe for the wall surface temperature is designed.
The project aims at novel measuring techniques for the characterization of fluid dynamic parameters of single and two-phase flows by means of the mesh-sensor technology and miniaturized thermoresistive sensors for a wall temperature measurement. The mesh sensors are based on recording of two-dimensional distributions of the electrical conductivity of the fluid with comparatively high sampling rates. The sensors represent a two-dimensional matrix of individual local measuring positions formed by pairs of electrodes (Fig. 1). The conductivity distribution is acquired by a signal acquisition technique that is capable in sampling a matrix of 16x16 points with a frequency of 10 kHz. In one dimension, the matrix can be enlarged without a decrease of the sampling frequency up to a size of the matrix of 16x128. In the second direction, a matrix extension leads to a reduction of the measuring frequency (e.g. for 64x128 it is 2.5 kHz, for 128x128 it is 1.28 kHz). The method and the first applications were developed by Prasser et al. (1998)* at the Forschungszentrum Rossendorf (today Helmholz Center Dresden Rossendorf). The first such sensor was a wire-mesh sensor, where the conductivity is measured at the crossing points between wires of two different grids crossing at 90 deg. The wire are span over the cross-section of the flow channel. As secondary quantities, local instantaneous concentration distributions of trancers affecting the conductivity of the fluid or the presence of a gaseous phase in a liquid continuum can be obtained. In this way, wire-mesh sensors can be used for complex two-phase flow studies as well as single-pfase mixing studies. The technology was brought to the Laboratory of Nuclear Energy Systems at ETH Zurich with the appointment of Prof. Prasser in 2006. Here, the main R&D activities concerned: 1. Development of signal processing methods for the extraction of individual buble velocities from raw signals of wire-mesh sensors (Simiano & Prasser, 2007) and improved bubble recognition algorithms (Prasser & Beyer, 2007). 2. Development of liquid film sensors, based on a matrix of electrodes mounted flush to the surface of the flow channel. The electrode matrix has similar electrical properties like wire-mesh sensors and can be connected to a standard signal acquisition unit of those (Fig. 2). The main results are liquid film sensors with a measuring range from 0.010 to 0.8 mm on a matrix of 16x64 with a lateral c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> pitch (lateral resolution) of 2 mm and a measuring frequency of 10 kHz (Damsohn & Prasser, 2009, see Fig. 3). A measuring result obtained in a wavy liquid film in a rectangular horizontal channel is presented in Fig. 4. These sensors were successfully applied in experiments on the structure of the coolant flow in cooling sub-channels in Boiling Water Reactors (see project "Coolant flow in nuclear fuel elements", 20613). This includes the development of methods for a detection of events of droplet deposition into the liquid film in a disperse-annular flow (Damsohn & Prasser, 2011). 3. Optimierung of liquid film sensors with regard to the measuring range by combining electrode grids of different lateral resolution on one and the same sensor surface. This sensor was tested in 2011 in cooperation with the FHNW and Endress & Hauser and applied to the characterisation of a two-phase flow in a horizontal pipe at high volumetric gas fractions. 4. First tests were performed concerning the extension of the signal acquisition of wire-mesh sensors by a multiple sampling of the ionic current after a stepwise change of the potential difference at the crossign point of the electrode wires (in the frame of a bachelor thesis). The goal is a detection of ion mobility in order to come to a sensor that is capable in measuring the concentration distributions of chemical species with a high spatial and temporal resolution. This work is planned to be continued. In the second part of the project, two types of miniturized sensor arrays are deveoped and manufactured in the clean room: (1) arrays of conductivity sensors as miniaturized version of the liquid film sensor described above, and (2) thermoresistive sensors for a temperature measurement exactly on the surface of the wall of a flow channel (Fig. 5). It is planned to use the latter in the project 20611 "Turbulent mixing of liquid flows" for the characterization of the heat transfer with the wall in case of a mxing process of two fluid streams of different temperature. Prasser, H.-M., Böttger, A., Zschau, J.: A New Electrode-Mesh Tomograph for Gas-Liquid Flows, Flow Measurement and Instrumentation 9 (1998), 111-119.