  Nutrient Use and Dynamics in Conservation Agriculture Including Legumes in the Midwest of the Malagasy Highlands  
This project conducted by the ETH, the LRI and the SCRID aims at understanding how conservation agriculture affects the fluxes and dynamics of N and P in the presence of legumes, and at identifying with farmers strategies that will allow using these resources in the most sustainable way.
Soil degradation in tropical agro-ecosystems results in increased food insecurity and in environmental degradation. Conservation agriculture has been proposed to sustainably improve agricultural production in the tropics. This approach combines direct-seeding, permanent mulch cover and a diverse crop rotation. It is being adopted by smallholders of the Midwest in Madagascar to control soil erosion, Striga spp. weeds on cereals and to provide forage for cattle. Whereas the effects of soil preparation on the one side, and of residue management on the other, have been studied, little work has been done on nitrogen (N) and phosphate (P) dynamics and their interaction in conservation agriculture as practiced by smallholders in the tropics. Nutrient limitations in these systems indeed might be one of the barriers hindering the adoption of conservation agriculture by smallholders. This project, developed in partnership between the Group of Plant Nutrition of the ETH Zurich, the Laboratory of Radio-Isotopes (LRI) of the University of Antananarivo and the International Research Unit on Sustainable Farming and Rice Cropping Systems (SCRID), aims at understanding how conservation agriculture affects the fluxes and dynamics of N and P in the presence of legumes, and at identifying with farmers strategies that will allow using these resources in the most sustainable way. This information will contribute to the development of tools to evaluate the relevance of conservation agriculture for smallholders. The project will be organized in 4 work packages (WP1-4). In WP1, we will conduct on-farm studies in reference areas of the Midwest where conservation agriculture has been adopted. A survey will allow evaluating the benefits and constraints to adopt conservation agriculture and locating adoption barriers. We will also assess crop performance and nutrient budgets in farmersS fields under conservation and conventional agriculture. In WP2, we will work in a researcher-managed field experiment to disentangle the effect of direct sowing from that of intercropping with the legume Stylosanthes guianensis (thereafter stylo) on maize and rice yields, root growth, and N and P dynamics. In this experiment, we will also measure N2 fixation by stylo using the natural 15N abundance method and N use by rice from different sources using both direct and indirect 15N labeling techniques. In WP3, we will study using appropriate 33P labeling techniques the uptake of P derived from different sources by stylo, Cajanus cajan and upland rice and the effect of legume residue application on the dynamics of microbial and organic P in soils. In WP4, we will evaluate the validity and relevance of the results beyond the reference areas studied in WP1. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> This will be done through an undergraduate studentsS work in the Midwest and by workshops with farmers, farmersS organizations and NGOs in the Midwest and in two other ecological zones of Madagascar. Results will be shared with stakeholders during field visits and workshops each year. The project will be accompanied by a reflection group representing the stakeholders who will give recommendations to the project members. This project will train one PhD and 6 MSc students from Madagascar, one PhD and one MSc student from Switzerland; it will strengthen the research capacity of the Malagasy partners and will lead to a long term partnership.