  High performance Materials in Earthquake Engineering 
The project aims to develop HFC (Hybrid Fiber Concrete) structures with superior seismic performance. HFC is a new high-performance material under development at IFB/ETHZ. Using medium scale tests on HFC walls and relevant FE analyses, design guidelines for novel structural systems are proposed.
The ability of capacity design principles to ensure a dependable ductile behavior of reinforced concrete structure is proved by a large amount of experimental evidence worldwide. However, the ductile behavior of such structures is also characterized by some drawbacks, i.e.: 1) premature spalling of the architectural and cover concrete can lead to major serviceability problems; 2) the most common failure mechanism of ductile structural elements consists in the tensile fracture of previously buckled reinforcement bars; 3) confinement, shear and architectural reinforcement require a high accuracy of placement that can be difficult to achieve; 4) the reinforcement content can be high, leading to a cumbersome placement; 5) the residual displacements after the seismic event can be important. Finite element analyses performed by the principal investigator showed that hybrid fiber concrete (HFC) structures can potentially overcome or at least reduce these drawbacks. HFC is a high performance material currently under development at the Institute of Building Material (IFB) of ETHZ. Aim of the project is the development of HFC structures with superior seismic performance. In a first stage, the project will focus on the seismic behavior of HFC walls and bridge piers. Preliminary tests on medium scale units are ongoing (See Figure 2) with the goal to: 1) optimize the mechanical properties of high performance HFC; 2) check and calibrate the FE analyses; 3) demonstrate the superior behavior of the proposed HFC structures; 4) outline potential problems relevant to HFC structures; 5) allow the development of a test matrix for the main tests.