  Bacillus Systems Biology  

BaSysBio is a multidisciplinary project aimed at achieving breakthroughs in our understanding of genetic control in bacteria at a global scale. The highly dynamic genetic regulation is mediated by transcription factors (TF) that bind DNA to recruit the transcription machinery and/or modify the local topology of the chromosome, and ultimately trigger or repress the expression of their target genes. To address how the fundamental biological processes are controlled by the complement of transcription factors encoded by the genome, BaSysBio will develop a Systems Biology approach using the highly tractable bacterium Bacillus subtilis, which is a leading organism for large-scale genetics, transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolic fluxes studies. The project will develop high throughput technologies such as living cell arrays, tiling DNA microarrays, (TF protein microarrays), and new multidimensional liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry tools for cell extracts analysis to generate quantitative data about promoter activities, RNA and TF levels, and TF DNA-binding sites in living cells. In parallel, new concepts in computational modelling will be elaborated to facilitate the understanding of biological complexity. Models will be developed to simulate the cellular transcriptional responses and their impacts on metabolism and proteome dynamics. Modelling will generate novel hypotheses about the mechanistic nature of dynamic cellular responses, and reveal emerging systems properties, which will then be validated or rejected by experimentation. A central focus of BaSysBio will be the standardisation of: the experimental procedures; data collection, treatment, storage and integration; unequivocal description of models; and unified computer codes. Furthermore, experts from all the disciplines in BaSysBio will design internal controls that will be built in the developed tools to ensure quality, homogeneity and comparability of data sets generated by the different partners. Global cell responses will be analysed during adaptation to two types of conditions; depletion of carbon source and stress to the cell envelope. The first condition will allow tackle the challenge of integrating the gene regulation dimension in existing models of metabolic pathways. The cell envelope stresses represent conditions widely encountered by bacteria in nature, especially during infection and treatment with antibiotics. The new knowledge and computational models acquired with B. subtilis, together with the parallel development of new methodologies in related Grampositive Staphylococci and Streptococci, which are major pathogens causing high morbidity and mortality in humans, will facilitate the prediction of the major pathways involved in pathogenesis, and the identification of potential new ways to combat disease-causing bacteria. Finally, at an organisational level BaSysBio will strongly promote a close and continuous interaction between modelling requirements, technology development and experimental planning and operation, including through multidisciplinary training. It is expected that BaSysBio will help overcome the structural obstacles that are hindering the development of systems biology in Europe. BaSysBio intends to apply as an integrated project to the fourth call of the first thematic priority of the 6th framework programme of the European Commission. The addressed action is SGene ¸ and the targeted topic is SA expression and proteomicsT ¸ systems approach to understanding the regulation of gene transcriptionT. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2>