  Development of an operating design space for mammalian cell cultivation process parameters  
Application of QbD concept to create a multidimensional design space for mammalian cell cultivation processes to ensure consistent culture performance and product quality of the produced mAbs. By simultaneously combine several process parameters (e.g. pH, DO, pCO2, hydrodynamic stress) at a time.
Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) have become a new generation of highly target specific pharmaceuticals. Their efficacy is highly dependent on post translational modifications which take place in the Golgi apparatus of the cell and cannot be replicated by chemical synthesis. This complex protein structures are therefore produced by mammalian cells using various bioreactors. Depending on the bioreactor volume this rather elaborated manufacturing process faces local parameter heterogeneities like pH peaks and their duration, dissolved oxygen and hydrodynamic stress. The effects of these fluctuations on the cell culture behavior and product quality are still not fully understood, but crucial in terms of efficacy, pharmacokinetics and immunogenicity of the mAbs. Since such heterogeneities are partly neglected during process development stages the main goal of the project is to apply Quality by Design (QbD) already in the early development phase while always keeping different scales in mind. Within the QbD approach the overall aim is to optimize the production process such that the cell performance is maximized and the predefined product quality is met. Therefore, multifactorial experiment design is necessary to identify the combinatory effects of several process parameters on the cell proliferation, productivity and product quality and determine threshold values for each parameter creating a multidimensional design space. The definition of this design space is normally done by the use of design of experiments (DoE), a statistical concept for experiments which requires a large number of runs to complete the threshold frame of the process conditions. To cover a broad range of operating parameters a recently developed two-zone bioreactor will be applied allowing the simultaneous variation of several parameters at a time. Using this scale down model a systematic investigation of two or more process parameters (e.g. pH, pO2, pCO2, shear stress) will be performed focusing on understanding their effect on cell metabolism considering extra- and intra-cellular metabolites as well as productivity and product quality. In contrast to DoE the investigation of oscillating conditions will be applied.