  Chromatin Fiber  
In their most condensed state, arrays of nucleosomes are helically arranged in a fiber approximately 30 nm in diameter. Revealing the structure of the chromatin fiber and how epigenetic modifications affect it is crucial to our understanding of gene regulation in the nucleus. 
In their most condensed state, arrays of nucleosomes are helically arranged in a fiber approximately 30 nm in diameter. We have prepared highly defined segments of chromatin fibers by in vitro assembly from defined components made individually in bacteria. We have demonstrated that, of the four histone N-terminal tails, a short region at the base of the histone H4 tail is necessary and sufficient to permit full compaction of the fiber [1]. With this information and knowledge of the nucleosome core structure [2], we performed site-specific chemical-crosslinking experiments in combination with electron microscopy to show that the chromatin fiber is based on a two-start or zigzag arrangement of nucleosomes [3]. We determined the crystal structure of a tetranucleosome at 9 Å resolution showing two stacks of two nucleosomes with three segments of linker DNA running between them [4]. The structure is compatible with a two-start, but not a one-start helix (e.g. the solenoid). A continuous fiber model was built by stacking tetranucleosomes on each other, resulting in a nucleosome higher-order structure that is nearly as fully compact as native chromatin based on mass per unit length measurements. Combined with information from structures of nucleosome core particles containing different lengths of DNA, our fiber model suggests how variations in DNA linker length can be accommodated. We are currently introducing epigenetic modifications into our chromatin fiber samples and analyzing the resulting material using gel electrophoresis, analytical ultracentrifugation, cryo-electron microscopy and X-ray crystallography. We are also pursuing the addition of other chromosomal proteins including histone H1, HP1 and elements of heterochromatin. Overview, figures, movies: http://www.mol.biol.ethz.ch/groups/richmond/projects Selected publications 1. Dorigo B., T. Schalch, K. Bystricky, and T. J. Richmond (2003) "Chromatin Fiber Folding: Requirement for the Histone H4 N-terminal Tail", J Mol Biol 327, 85. 2. Davey C. A., D. F. Sargent, K. Luger, A. W. Mäder, and T. J. Richmond (2002) "Solvent mediated interactions in the structure of the nucleosome core particle at 1.9 Å resolution", J Mol Biol 319, 1097. 3. Dorigo B., T. Schalch, A. Kulangara, S. Duda, R. R. Schroeder, and T. J. Richmond (2004) "Nucleosome Arrays Reveal the Two-Start Organization of the Chromatin Fiber", Science 306, 1571. 4. Schalch T., S. Duda, D. F. Sargent, and T. J. Richmond (2005) "X-ray structure of a tetranucleosome and its implications for the chromatin fibre", Nature 436, 138. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2>