  Exploring rice genetic resources for identification of novel alleles of rice blast resistance genes 
Rice blast is one of the most devastating fungal diseases in rice, causing heavy annual yield losses. We undertake large scale allele mining on a geographically diverse set of over 4S000 rice germplasm accessions to identify novel rice blast resistance genes.
Continuous improvement of crop plants is essential for sustainable agriculture in the coming decades and this relies on the use of genetic variability. Global gene banks have conserved genetic diversity, but these resources remain largely under-explored. In this project, we explore this hidden diversity from rice genetic resources, in order to identify and isolate novel alleles of rice blast resistance genes. Rice contributes greatly to the global food security, being a staple for more than half of the worldSs population. Rice blast is one of the most devastating fungal diseases in rice, causing heavy annual economic losses in terms of yield and grain quality. Resistance conferred by most of the single blast resistance genes are broken down after a few years of intensive agricultural use, succumbing to dynamic nature of the fungus. Therefore, resistance breeding requires constant efforts to enrich the reservoir of favorable resistance genes/alleles in rice to effectively tackle the disease. We undertake large scale allele mining on a geographically diverse yet focused set of over 4S000 rice germplasm accessions. The accessions are being subjected to a hierarchical selection procedure of phenotypic and molecular screening. We aim at isolation of novel blast resistance alleles, that could be deployed in rice breeding programs, through approaches, such as, gene pyramiding, multilines and cultivar mixtures; and thus, leading to increased and sustainable genetic diversity in the rice fields. The project will allow us to broaden the allelic resources for upcoming rice breeding programs aimed at sustainable rice blast resistance, and will contribute to our understanding of molecular function and evolution of rice blast resistance genes.