  Electrochemically controlled growth, dissolution and stretching of layer-by-layer films towards biomedical application  

Establishing a direct connection between electrical devices and a biological organism is not only a fascinating research field but also highly important in biomedical applications such as implanted sensors, pacemakers, or hearing aids. The need for glucose sensing alone has generated a billion USD/year industry illustrating the magnitude of the problem. Although it is commonly accepted that continuous monitoring with implanted sensors would be highly beneficial for the therapy, nearly all of todaySs glucose measurements are performed in vitro because the fibrous encapsulation of implanted sensors within a few days is prohibitive to their wide-spread use. In this project we aim at developing a platform technology that allows for the electronically controlled, local delivery of drugs. We believe that this technology will not only have the potential to solve the encapsulation problem because it is analogous to the concept of drug-eluting stents that prevent restenosis but also have applications in other areas and in fundamental research. In order to reach this goal we propose the following specific aims: T ¸ To develop a platform technology using the electronically controlled growth and dissolution of layer-by-layer (LbL) polyelectrolyte films for the controlled release of bioactive molecules (i.e. anti-inflammatory drugs or neurotransmitters); T ¸ To understand and model the mechanisms of the reversible, electrochemically induced stretching and expansion of LbL films with incorporated redox-active molecules and find the conditions for the highest proportional thickness change; T ¸ To develop novel, intelligent polymer films that can change their shape on the micron- and nanoscale under electrical control and explore their applications in biomedicine and biotechnology. We are in a privileged situation to realize this project because in the past few years we have developed unique instrumentation and expertise that allow us to perform the proposed experiments. We will use a combination of electrochemical (ec) and in situ biosensing and characterization tools on micro- and nano- structured samples to optimize the effect of the key parameters on the drugreleasing process and to confirm the integrity of the delivered drugs. In addition, we will explore our invention about the reversible stretching of LbL films to realize a smart filtering concept and to create intelligent polymer coatings with electronically controlled shape. We will also develop a simulation model that is capable of the quantitative assessment of the charge distribution within a polyelectrolyte film over microelectrodes with special focus on the local concentration of redoxactive compounds. Besides understanding and establishing the proposed platform technology we also expect two patents and about ten peer-reviewed publications as a realistic output of our project.