  A nanoparticulate matrix for the development of gas-selective sensors  
Transparent nanoparticulate ink-jet paper is an excellent matrix to create optical gas-selective sensors. Specific organometallic compounds are added by spin-coating and react with a change in the electromagnetic spectrum to the partial pressure of the target gas. The  features are surprising.
Description, Abstract Nanoparticulate inorganic materials constitute a promising substrate to develop gas-selective chemical sensors with high resistance to heat and gamma irradiation. CCS recently got access to nanostructured ink-jet papers produced at Ilford, Marly, Switzerland. Various paper qualities made from different metal oxides and additives are accessible where the porosity, the pore volume and the pore size are well defined [US 6,156,419 patent]. Referred to the chemistry of the metal oxide, the surface charge of the pores can be negative or positive. The influence of electrostatic interactions on the specific chemical reaction of the organometallic compound adsorbed within the pores and the target gas was studied. The ink-jet papers were shown to be indeed resistant to gammairradiation and to autoclavation (humidity and heat) opposite to plasticized polymer membranes. Organometallic complexes (OMCs) such as phtalocyaninato Fe(II), Ru(II)- and Ir(III) complexes as well as pH- and pCO2-sensitive indicators with appropriate pK, in addition to additives were dissolved in a volatile solvent and applied to the nanostructured film by spin-coating. The analytical performance of these films to the varying partial pressure of specific gases was investigated. Organometallic compounds were synthesized and synthetically modified in collaboration with the group of Prof. M. Graetzel, EPFL, in order to study the interactions between the surface of the mesopores and the specific OMC. In conclusion, the stability of the chemical compounds insulated within the mesopores and the homogeneity of the films is improved compared to solvent polymeric membranes. In addition, the chemically modified nanostructured film responds within seconds to the target gas. The chemical reactions going on within the nanoporous structure were investigated using the internal special optical equipment for the investigation of gas-selective sensors and sensor arrays. The chemical mechanisms were investigated by solution NMR and the SBSR-technique which is used with FTIR-ATR-spectroscopy at CCS. The characteristics of the films were correlated to the specific parameters of nanoporosity (see results). Materials and methods: Nanostructured materials such as aluminum oxide (AlOOH), silicon oxide (SiO2) and zirconium oxide (ZrO2) embedded into PVA were investigated as potential matrices to incorporate organometallic compounds (OMCs) for the development of optical oxygen-sensitive sensors based on luminescence quenching. The OMCs used in this work were: ETHT-3003 (tris(4,7-bis(4-octylphenyl)-1,10-phenanthroline) ruthenium(II)), N-926 (bis(2-phenylpyridinyl)-N4,N4,N4S,N4S-tetramethyl-(4,4S-diamine-2,2Sbipyridine) iridium(III) chlorate), N-833 (tetrabutylammonium bis(isothiocyanate) bis(2-phenylpyridinyl)iridium(III)) and N-837 (tetrabutylammonium bis(cyanate) bis(2-phenylpyridinyl)-iridium(III)) [5]; iron phthalocyaninato complexes solubilized in a number of amine solvents such as p-decylaniline, benzylamine and dioctylamine [6]. The organometallic compounds (OMCs) as well as pH- and pCO2-sensitive indicators with appropriate pKa were incorporated into the nanostructured films and the analytical performance of these materials were investigated. Compounds were synthesized and synthetically modified in col- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> laboration with the group of Prof. M. Graetzel, EPFL, in order to study interactions between the mesopores and the OMCs. Equipment Luminescence measurements used for O2: Perkin-Elmer LS-50B luminescence spectrometer fitted ´1 nm with a xenon flash lamp and a Hamamatsu R-928 red-sensitive photomultiplier which has s ´0.5 nm reproducibility of wavelength, in a usual way for accuracy at the specified wavelength and s solid samples with a 30 r/60 r excitation/emission geometry. A self-built flow-through cell was used in all the experiments [2]. For NO2, CO and CO2-sensitive sensors: The chemical reactions going on within the nanoporous structure were investigated by changes in the electromagnetic spectrum (internal special equipment for the investigation of optical gas-selective sensors and sensor arrays by optical transmission spectroscopy). The reaction mechanism of CO2-sensitive sensors was investigated by FT-IRspectroscopy using a special ATR sample cell and the SBSR-equipment offered by OPTISPEC, Neerach (Prof. U. Fringeli). The chemical mechanisms involved in the molecular interactions between NO2, an amine solubilizing the OMC and the iron phthalocyaninato-complex were investigated by solution NMR and by an X-ray structural study in collaboration with P.S. Pregosin, ETHZ. Sterilization protocols: (1) An autoclave from Napco (Model 8000) at a temperature of 121 rC and a pressure of 1 bar for 20 minutes were used. (2) chemical cleaning (cleaning in place; CIP and (3) gamma irradiation. The CIP protocol consisted in treating the membranes by NaOH (1 M) or H3PO4 (2.5%) at 50 rC during 30 min, then purged with de-ionized water and, finally, drying under ambient conditions. The gamma-irradiation protocol consisted in the exposition of the membrane to 14.5 KGy during 30 min. Summary of a selection of relevant results: Oxygen-selective films based on luminescence quenching: The incorporation of the OMCs into the nanopores increases their luminescence quantum yield up to 85% (excitation at 400 nm, emission at 530 nm) for the Ir(III) complexes (bis(2-phenylpyridinyl)N4,N4,N4S,N4S-tetramethyl-(4,4S-diamine-2,2S-bipyridine) iridium(III) chlorate) and the sensitivity to molecular oxygen by a factor of >40 (Stern-Volmer constant) for the Ru(II)-complex ETHT 3003 (tris(4,7-bis(4-octylphenyl)-1,10-phenanthroline) ruthenium(II)) (excitation at 460 nm, emission at 620 nm). Surprisingly, the total pore volume and the pore size played a crucial role for the sensitivity of the luminescence quenching reaction whereas the reaction was insensitive to the chemistry of the nanostructured metal oxides. The critical limit was a pore diameter <15 nm and a total pore volume <15ml m-2 which can be explained by the large volume of some of the organometallic compounds. The co-incorporation of Ir(III) complexes and ETH 3003 allowed to achieve an efficient fluorescence energy transfer (FRET) between both due to the dense package of the OMCs within the nanoparticulate material. The nearly ideal overlap of the electromagnetic spectra of N-926 and ETH 3003 results in a nearly complete transfer of energy between both compounds. Nanoparticulate optical films selective to nitrogen dioxide (NO2): A phthalocyaninatoiron(II) complex solubilized in a number of amine solvents such as p-decylaniline, benzylamine and dioctylamine [6] showed promising performance in view of the selective detecti- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> on of the NO2-partial pressure in air of 50% humidity [5]. Incorporated into a nanoparticulate film, a detection limit of 20 ppm NO2 was achieved (approx. 40.10-6 g m-3). The role of the amine, which has to solubilize the OMC, was investigated in detail. It is involved in a ligand exchange reaction with NO2 and CO where only one amine ligand is leaving the metal center (optical absorption max. at 659 nm). This reaction and the influence of a temperature of 60oC was investigated by solution NMR in collaboration with P. Pregosin (ETHZ). The structure and geometry of the solubilized complex was investigated by X-ray. In contrast to the Ru(II)- and Ir(III)-complexes, the coordination of NO2 to and the ligand exchange with the solubilized phthalocyaninatoiron(II) complex only occurred if the surface of the mesopores was positively charged. Results of the investigations of CO2 and CO sensors will be published soon. Earlier, gas sensors selective to ammonia, amines, alcohols, humidity and aldehydes were published. CCS has outstanding competences in this field. Relevant literature: a) J.R. Bacon and J.N. Demas, Anal. Chem., 59, 2780, 1987. b) M.E. Lippitsch, J. Pusterhofer, M.J.P. Leiner, and O.S. Wolfbeis, Anal. Chim. Acta, 205, 1, 1988. T. Roth, Ruthenium (II) diimine complexes for luminescence-based oxygen sensors, PhD Thesis, Diss ETH No 14001, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Zurich, 2000. G.J. Mohr, G. Zhylyak. T. Nezel, U.E. Spichiger-Keller, N. Kerness, O. Brand, H. Baltes, and U.W. Grummt, Anal. Sciences (Japan) 18, 109, 2002. T. Nezel, U.E. Spichiger-Keller, Ch. Ludin, A. Hensel, CHIMIA, 55/9, 725, 2001. M.K. Nazeeruddin, R. Humphry-Baker, D. Berner, B.S. Rivier, L. Zuppiroli, M. Graetzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 125 (2003) 8790. a) T. Nezel, Investigation and development of selective polymeric liquid membranes for the optical detection of NO2 with chemical sensors, PhD Thesis, Diss ETH No 14602, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Zurich, 2002.