  The L3 Experiment at LEP  

 The L3 experiment at the Large Electron Positron collider LEP (CERN, Geneva Switzerland) studies electron-positron annihilation at high center of mass energies. The main aims of the experiment are - to precisely determine the properties of the neutral Z and charged W vector bosons, the carriers of the electroweak forces; - to investigate the interplay between charged and neutral weak interactions through the observation of non-zero couplings between the W and Z bosons; - to search for new particles and new interactions. The experiment has collected so far, from 1990 to 1995, about 5 million Z boson decays at energies in the vicinity of the Z boson mass. In the fall of 1995 the center of mass energy of the LEP collider has been increased by a factor 1.5 allowing for new measurements of physics processes which can be compared with the prediction of the theory at this new higher energy. The measurements are generally found to be in good agreement with the theoretical predictions. Thus more stringent bounds on new particles and interactions have been set. In the summer of 1996 the center of mass energy has been further increased such that pairs of W boson could be produced for the first time at an electron positron collider. The LEP collider is expected to run from 1997 to 1999 at energies well beyond the minimum needed for production of W boson pairs, delivering an amount of data to the experiments such that the properties of W bosons will be measured with high precision. With the increased energies, additional processes predicted by the standard theory of elementary particles will become measurable and will allow to test the detailed prediction of the theory at these higher energies. In addition, with the increased energy, new particles with masses well beyond the limits previously set might be produced and observed by the experiment. Thus, a better understanding of the fundamental constituents of matter will be reached and light will be shed on the origin and evolution of the universe.