  Spin polarized x-ray photo emission  
Time resolved x-ray photoemission is uses to investigate the dynamical properties of magnetic solids. In a pump probe setting the light from free electron laser systems serves for the photoemission probe and short infrared laser pulses are used for pumping.
Solid state dynamics is governed by the coupling between different degrees of freedom. Laser pulses for example directly interact with the electrons of a solid. However till today the fundamental relaxation processes between electrons, phonons and magnons which occur on ultra short time scales are unresolved. Their understanding would represent a major achievement in solid state physics and would help to clarify the fundamental limits in thermally assisted data writing processes. Laser induced demagnetization involves all three fundamental thermodynamic reservoirs of a sample: the electronic system, the spin system and the lattice. In order to be able to measure a demagnetization process and to clarify the coupling between these reservoirs it is important to probe the true magnetization and to exclude possible optical effects. The most direct measure of the magnetization is the spin polarization of photoelectrons. We propose to measure the demagnetization of a ferromagnet during and after a pump pulse for two different wave lengths infrared and THz (the THz pumping experiment is not part of this proposal). We know that pumping in the optical regime leads to demagnetization. We intend to follow the spin polarization of the ferromagnet as a function of pump-probe delay after excitation by a laser pulse of 800nm wave length. We will also measure the dependence of the spin polarization on the soft x-rays (VUV) probe pulse energy. This will allow us to test if the FEL VUV pulse is able to demagnetize the sample within its own length. The high frequency of the FEL radiation may not be able to induce demagnetization through coherent processes [1]. This experiment is expected to offer a possibility of measuring the effect of a hot electron gas on the magnetization alone. In order to obtain a reliable measure of the magnetization, which is a Brillouin zone average over photons [2] in the all filled spin polarized band states, one needs to employ high-energy Sprobe ¸ T form of the soft x-rays available with FLASH. As spin is conserved in elastic photoemission with linearly polarized radiation available at FLASH, the spin polarization of the elastic valence electrons provide an accurate measure of the magnetization, or more precisely, a measurement of the spin part of the magnetization, which is in fact what one needs to know in the first place [3-5]. Notice that space charge effects do not affect the spin polarization of the emitted electrons as electron-electron scattering conserves angular momentum. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> 1. J.Y. Bigot et al., Nature Physics 5, 515 (2009). 2. W. Weber, S. Riesen, and H. C. Siegmann, Science 291, 1015 (2001). 3. F. Meier et al., J. Mag.Mag.Mat. 93, 523 (1991). 4. E. Garwin et al., Nucl. Instr.and Methods 120, 483 (1974). 5. H.-S. Rhie, H.A. Dürr, and W. Eberhardt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 247201 (2003).