  Direct numerical simulation of flow, heat transfer, and autoignition in engine-like geometries  
This project aims at performing large scale direct numerical simulations in engine-like geometries employing a highly scalable and effiecient parallel, spectral element low  Mach number code to shed light into the complex interactions between flow and thermochemistry in unsteady engine flows.
Internal combustion engine flows are turbulent, unsteady and exhibit high cycle-to-cycle variations. Turbulence generation mechanisms are multiple and their effects overlap in time and space, rendering the simple turbulence models currently used in industry inappropriate for the in-depth understanding of underlying mechanisms as well as for predictive purposes. Even currently emerging LES-models for engine flows are subject to uncertainties with respect to sub-grid scale models, particularly for processes in the proximity of walls, which are prominent in engine combustion chambers. Experimentally, optical methods have provided valuable insight into turbulent engine flows during the last 30 years. Despite recent progress, inherent limitations with respect to the efficient scanning of the whole domain with sufficient spatial resolution down to the smallest flow scales and in the proximity of walls still persist. Features of the high frequency part of the turbulence kinetic energy and dissipation spectrum and the associated interactions with the larger scales can therefore be uncovered only to a limited extent through measurements, and with heavy experimental effort. This project aims at performing very large scale direct numerical simulations, first of non-reacting and then of a few autoigniting cases with gaseous mixtures, in engine-like geometries employing a highly scalable and effiecient parallel, spectral element low Mach number code. We intend to investigate the following processes: T ¸ Evolution of turbulent flow parameters as a function of the initial conditions after intake valve closing (including swirl and tumble) and combustion chamber geometry (compression ratio, clearance height, bowl-in-piston depth and diameter) in gaseous, non-reactive cases T ¸ Evolution of the unsteady hydrodynamic and thermal boundary layer structure during compression and expansion for the above mentioned parameter variation T ¸ Autoignition and combustion of gaseous mixtures employing sufficiently detailed chemistry and to study the multiple interactions between flow and thermo chemistry including near-wall phenomena. The results of these simulations can be used for multiple purposes. Firstly, they will shed light into the complex interactions between flow and thermochemistry in unsteady engine flows. Secondly, they can be used to validate, or identify the shortcomings of models used in conventional RANS or LES approaches for describing turbulent engine flows. Finally, they can be used to guide future experiments for mutual (cross-) validation.