  Ultra-Precise Klystron Modulator for Compact Linear Colliders  

At CERN a new type of electron-positron linear collider (CLIC) with very high particle energies is studied at the moment. The accelerating principle relies on energy transfer from a drive beam to a main beam. For generating the drive beam a linear accelerator is required using more than 1600 klystrons in synchronised pulsed mode for RF power production. The desired specifications of the modulators regarding pulse repetition accuracy are very challenging and require conceptual new approaches, which are going be investigated during this project. The klystron modulators should be able to generate pulses with a voltage amplitude of 150kV at a current amplitude of 160A, which corresponds to a pulse power of 24MW. The pulse length is 140 microseconds. To meet the specified pulse quality, very demanding specifications such as a pulse-to-pulse reproducibility of 0.001% must be fulfilled. Furthermore, the voltage droop during the pulse must be smaller than 0.85%. In order to meet the highly demanding requirements, first novel system concepts for the modulator are investigated. Due to the high voltage amplitude a pulse transformer is used, which has to meet the above mentioned requirements. In order to limit the amount of stored energy as well as the costs and space consumption, a bouncer circuit is required. Due to the high demands on the reproducibility, the design of the bouncer circuit is very challenging and will require new approaches. This is also true for the charging circuit and the voltage measurement of the charging circuit, which both must also meet the requirements on the reproducibility. In a second step, a multi-domain simulation model of the entire converter system is developed in order to predict its behaviour. In the third step, the converter system will be optimized ensuring high conversion efficiency and optimal performance at minimal size. To validate the results, a full scale prototype system will be realized in the last stage of the project.