  Kinematic GPS and Precise Navigation  
Algorithms are developed to determine the GPS positions of moving objects at highest possible precision. GPS is also used to determine the attitude of a vehicle. The  developed tools have been tested and used in many applications (aero geophysics, ropeway survey, hydrometrics, etc.).
Satellite geodetic methods are opening up a wide field of research and applications. A main focus of interest is the introduction of GPS in kinematic surveying, allowing the tracking of moving platforms, such as cars, water-going vessels and aircrafts. A large range of applications include trajectography and attitude determination in airborne gravimetry and laser altimetry, photogrammetric aerotriangulation and GPS buoy surveys. High-precision kinematic GPS positioning relies on differential carrier phase measurements. For high-precision positioning the resolution of phase ambiguities and cycle slip detection are crucial problems which are being studied in this project. The quality of the GPS solutions can be degraded by various factors like tropospheric refraction, radio frequency interference, or obstruction of satellite visibility. In applications like airborne gravimetry and laser altimetry, correct position and attitude measurements are crucial to the production of accurate data. Algorithms are developed to compute the GPS positions, accelerations and attitudes of moving objects at highest possible accuracy. For precise attitude determination, the moving platform can be equipped with an array of at least four GPS receivers, allowing to retrieve the attitude by moving-baselines processing. Furthermore, the GGL has developed light-weight GPS buoys for precise kinematic sea level and flow determination. To monitor the movements of submerged objects, a spherical measurement unit has been developed containing two accelerometer triads (Villiger, 2008). This unit will especially help to monitor the debris flow within a water flow. Using adequate processing algorithms, kinematic GPS positioning at cm level is possible, even in high dynamic applications. With a final accuracy of attitude angles of about 0.05 r, it has been shown that the multi-antenna GPS method can be used for attitude determination in airborne laser altimetry, as well as for other applications where a good GPS satellite visibility is warranted. An application of the developed methods has been demonstrated by monitoring the three dimensional movement and oscillations of ropeways by GPS. The determination of the exact position of free hanging cables causes certain difficulties especially in rugged terrain. Even more complicate is the determination of the path of a cabin of a ropeway, because this curve is not visualised by a cable or a rope. The determination of the path by classical methods is very time consuming and often impossible. In many cases the path can satisfacorily be calculated by approved mathematical models. However, in cases where the curve should be known exactly GPS-positioning has to be applied. A very important aspect considers the oscillations of the vehicle. The determination of oscillations is of major interest for the safety assessment of an installation. Passing at the towers, wind loading and emergency stops are operations possibly causing unfavourable oscillations of the cabin. The complete oscillatory movement can be monitored by attaching at least three GPS receivers to the cabin. It has been shown that it is possible to determine relevant physical and geometrical parameters of a ropeway installation as well as the oscillatory or attitude part of its movement. Real measurements confirm the efficiency of the method and reveal the high resolution c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> for the determination of the complete 3-D movement (translations and oscillations) of the ropeway. The frequency and the amplitude of different oscillating modes induced by an emergency stop can clearly be determined. This work has been carried out by Matthias Kistler during a joint diploma thesis at the Institute of Cartography and the GGL.