  The transition from continent to ocean: age and nature of Permian to Jurassic mafic magmatismin Tasna and Platta nappes (Pennine domains, Central Alps) 

 Gabbros associated with rifted continental margins may document magmatic underplating of continental crust, passively exhumed during much later rifting or, alternatively, initiation of partial melting during rifting incipient sea-floor spreading. Both types appear to occur along present-day ocean continent transitions (OCT), e.g. along the Iberian margin off Portugal. In the eastern Alps of Switzerland the two types can be distinguished based on age, field relations and thermobarometric data. In the Alps, OCTs bordering the southern Piemont segment of the Alpine Tethys (Platta nappe) and the northern Valais ocean (Tasna nappe of the Engadine window) to the southeast are partly preserved. Gabbroic intrusions occur along both OCTs, however, their ages, mode of emplacement and geodynamic significance are highly different. In the Tasna OCT, continental basement rocks are separated from serpentinized lherzolite by a low-angle fault. Both continental and mantle rocks are stratigraphically overlain by Lower Cretaceous black shales sealing a previously exhumed low-angle normal fault that exposed serpentinized peridotites at the sea floor during Mesozoic rifting. Lenses of mylonitic clinopyroxene- and amphibole-gabbro occur along the tectonic contact between the serpentinite and the continental basement and between the exhumed serpentinites and the overlying Cretaceous shales. U-Pb zircon ages of 254 Ma have been determined on gabbro zircons (Froitzheim and Rubatto, 1999, Terra Nova) as well as on crosscutting undeformed tonalite dikes, interpreted as intrusion age. Emplacement and deformation of this gabbro is therefore related to Permian extension and magmatic underplating and not to mantle exhumation during Mesozoic rifting, as previoulsy assumed. In the Platta nappe, gabbroic intrusions associated with serpentinized mantle rocks are intruded by basaltic dikes and occur as clasts in pillow breccias within a matrix of radiolarite of late Middle to Late Jurassic age as well. One particular body near Mazzaspitz, 200 m long and 20m across is composed of Mg-gabbro, Fe-gabbro and Fe-Ti gabbro, and is cut by hornblende-bearing pegmatoid veins. Field evidence and mineral chemistry of the clinopyroxene are consistent with a in situ differentiation of different gabbro types from the same parental magma. A diffuse high-temperature foliation indicates that the gabbros intruded into a tectonically active setting. U-Pb dating of low-uranium zircons of the Fe-Ti-gabbro and a dioritic vein from Mazzaspitz, as well as from a more easterly occurring pegmatoid gabbro (Alp Natons), yielded an age of 160.6 Ma. Age, crystallization sequence and thermobarometric data suggest that the gabbro intruded at a crustal level after break up of the continental crust and may document the initiation of sea floor spreading.