  Global and Local food chain Assessment: a MUltidimensional peRformance-based approach (GLAMUR)  
GLAMUR is a project that will compare local food chains with global food chains in a multidimensional perspective. Indicators of sustainable performance will be used to compare case studies in 10 countries around Europe in six food sectors, including dairy and wine in Switzerland.
Description Currently, there is an increasing consumersS awareness about the impact of food products on the environment, on their health or on social aspects. Indeed, consumersS demand for food produced locally has increased significantly as a consequence of their willingness to purchase quality products and to support local economy and local farms (King et al., 2010). For this reason, more accurate scientific answers are needed to understand those impacts. The EU project SGlobal ¸ and local food assessment: a multidimensional performance-based approachT (GLAMUR) was thus launched to assess the sustainability of food chains and determine which chains (global or local) perform better. The project adopts a multi-dimensional perspective that combines qualitative and quantitative approaches around five sustainability dimensions (environment, economy, social, health and ethics). The sustainability comparison will be conducted on case studies of food value chains (FVC) in ten countries involved in the project. GLAMUR is a project funded by the European UnionSs 7th Framework Program. The first specific goal for the Swiss team (Emilia SchmittSs PhD) is first to delimit how the dimensions of local and global can be defined for food value chains. Criteria of distinction will be established from literature and will be applied to the case studies. The second objective is to conduct the comparison of local and global supply chains with relevant sustainability indicators. These indicators will be constructed from sustainability assessment methods, such as the SAFA guidelines from FAO, or created. The testing and improvement of the methodology is also a part of the aim of this research. A participatory approach will be used for the selection and construction of the indicators. Two case studies in the fresh milk branch serve as a pilot case study, in order to test the method, and two case studies in the cheese sector and wine sector will then constitute the final cases. Methods In order to assess the multi-dimensional performance of the food value chains (FVC), a set of attributes will be developed, deriving from the analysis of the countriesS contexts and issues related to FVCs. Each of the five dimensions will thus be represented by a certain number of attributes. For ´ example, the dimension of Senvironmental performanceS could be represented by attributes such ´ ´ ´ as SbiodiversityS, SGreenhouse gases emissions or SResource useS. Actors in the agro-food sectors of Switzerland will participate in the selection and construction of the attributes. Each of these attributes will then be divided into a series of indicators, which are precise measures, as for exam´ ple SCO2 emissions from transport meansS. The final set of indicators should be relatively small to allow for efficient collection of data but broad enough to cover all dimensions in the project. ´ We intend to follow the SSustainability Assessment of Food and Agriculture SystemsS (SAFA) guidelines of the FAO that gives indications on how to select and work with indicators. Moreover, ´ important articles, such as the SSustainability Solution SpaceS from Binder et al. (2012) give more c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> inputs from practice with indicators in the relevant context. The set of indicators used in each case porc U wine U across Europe will depend of the country context and sector of the case (dairy U cereals U fruits - vegetables) as some indicators become irrelevant in some contexts. Concerning data collection for the indicatorsS measurements, a variety of sources will be used. As there is a trade-off between the quantity of indicators we can inform and the precision of measures, it will not be possible in this project to take direct measurements or samples on the field because the scope of the project is specifically broad. Secondary sources, such as national, regional or company statistics, will be used to inform quantitative indicators, and interviews with concerned stakeholders will complement them as well as provide qualitative data. As the sustainability assessment will be conducted on food value chains, interviews will be conducted with actors at each step of the value chain (producers, processing, distribution, retailing, etc). In order to score the performance of the FVC, the values of the indicators will be measured on a scale. That means that for each indicator, it is needed to have a value of maximum performance possible (the higher benchmark) and a value that delimitates the unacceptable performance (the ´ Slower benchmark). These benchmarks are delimited from literature or expert consultation and can be different from case to case, according to the sector and context. Some indicators will be measured on the whole FVC and get just one value but some indicators are measured on one specific step of the FVC. The combination of the indicatorsS scores gives the performance at the attribute level and dimension level. The performance obtained in each attribute will be compared between the local and global chains in order to identify the dimensions in which they perform differently. The casesS performance will also be compared between the countries in order to enrich the comparison and analyze which contextual factors influence the performance of the different FVCs. ´ Figure 1 below gives an example as shown in the SAFA guidelines with the Ssustainability polygonS, where the lower performance is in red color and the higher performance in greens. They have four dimensions, but we will have five in the GLAMUR project. Figure 1: Sustainability polygon from the SAFA guidelines (FAO, 2013) Preliminary results In the search for case studies and their selection, it appears that the delimitation between local and global value chains is fuzzy. From the very short supply chain of one farmer selling his produce himself to one of dozens of intermediaries on several continents, the boundary between local and global is hard to situate. We further elaborated through preliminary interviews and literature ´ review that the SlocalS aspect of a food supply chain is defined through several aspects. The GLAMUR theoretical framework identifies 4 main key-dimensions to differentiate local from global supply chains: 1. The physical / geographical distance between production and consumption 2. The type of governance and organization of the supply chain (degree of control of Slocal ¸ actorsT and Sglobal ¸ actorsT) 3. The kind of resources, knowledge and technologies employed 4. The way product identity is shaped with regard to the reference to the territory of production The project will seek to further define differences and selection criteria to place FVCs on this scale between local and global. Case studies could however already be selected. The pilot case study was successfully conducted with two milk value chains: the Lait des Prés (pasture milk) as a regional brand with limited imported inputs, compared to a generic supermarket milk brand. Two chains c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> were selected in the cheese sector with LSEtivaz as a local alp cheese produced in small quantities and the Gruyère cheese as a world famous exported cheese produced in much higher quantities. Despite this distinction, the two cheese present similarities as for example both are part of a PDO scheme with a book of requirements defining the production area. They both present a strong identity with a territory and also both cheeses are exported in many countries. However, after exploring many possibilities in Switzerland, these two cheeses present a good case of comparison that was confirmed by some interviewed actors. They will furthermore be compared with British cheeses presenting differences like the Cheddar, Stilton and Gloucester cheese. In the wine sector, the red wines from Wallis will be studied as local FVC, with a special focus on autochthon varieties sold in short value chains. They will be compared with bulk wines imported from the high-producing region of South of France as a global example. Concerning the performance assessment, attributes could be defined for the cheese and wine sector and they are shown in table 1. These attributes were selected with the participation of stakeholders from the list of 24 attributes established from the GLAMUR project. The performance in these attributes will further be compared between the cheese FVC (UK and Switzerland) and between the wine FVC (France and Switzerland) but not between cheese and wine, as the type of production and processing, or even consumption are very different and not comparable. Table 1: liste of attributes used in the case studies (cheese and wine) Cheese Wine 1 Consumer behavior 1 Food safety 2 Information and Communication 2 Information and Communication 3 Resource use 3 Resource use 4 Biodiversity 4 Biodiversity 5 Animal Welfare 5 Governance 6 Nutrition 6 Territoriality 7 Creation and Distribution of added value 7 Creation and Distribution of added value 8 Pollution 8 Pollution 9 Affordability Discussion At this stage of the project, methodological challenges are still present concerning for example the aggregation of the performance scores between different indicators that might have different weights. The definition of benchmarks with relevant sources also remains a challenge. The main difficulty of such assessments is to stay objective, as Born and Purcell (2006) warn that researcher and that could influence the selection of cases might consider local food chains as Sa ¸ priori betterT, ´ and indicators. In order to avoid this bias that they call the Slocal trapS, indicators are firstly taken from existing projects and also actors from the case studies are involved in the selection of the indicators. The countries in the project could already identify several contradictory discourses in the national contexts that define performance of food supply chains in totally different ways. Some tend to define it as the ability to feed the world and use resources the most efficiently, regardless of where and how food is produced, and another discourse focuses more on the management practices and long term sustainability of the system. These different perspectives have obviously different priorities regarding indicatorsS sets to define performance. Thus, the first ongoing part of the project focuses on this crucial question to define a common set of indicators. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 4> Relevant literature Binder, C. R., Schmid, A., & Steinberger, J. K. (2012). Sustainability solution space of the Swiss milk value added chain. Ecological Economics, 83, 210U220. Elsevier B.V. Born, B., & Purcell, M. (2006). Avoiding the Local Trap: Scale and Food Systems in Planning Research. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 26, 195U207. Edwards-Jones, G., Milà i Canals, L., Hounsome, N., Truninger, M., Koerber, G., Hounsome, B., the challenges of an evidenceJones, D. L. (2008). Testing the assertion that Slocal ¸ food is bestT: based approach. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 19(5), 265U274. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). (2013). SAFA Sustainability Assessment of Food and Agriculture Systems Guidelines. King, R. P., Hand, M. S., Digiacomo, G., Clancy, K., Gómez, M. I., Hardesty, S. D., Lev, L., et al. (2010). Comparing the Structure, Size, and Performance of Local and Mainstream Food Supply Chains. OSHara, S. U., & Stagl, S. (2001). Global Food Markets and Their Local Alternatives/: A SocioEcological Economic Perspective. Population and Environment: A Journal of Interdisciplinary Stu dies, 22(6), 533U554. Van der Vorst, J. G. a. J. (2006). Chapter 2: Performance measurement in agri-food supply-chain networks. In C. J. Ondersteijn (Ed.), Quantifying the agri-food supply chain (pp. 15U26). Springer.