  Genome-wide patterns of nucleotide diversity and divergence in wild tomatoes (Solanum section Lycopersicon): inferences on demographic history, speciation, and natural selection  
This project will determine range-wide levels of nucleotide diversity for multiple wild tomato species, information that will be used to assess both the historical demography and modes of speciation, as well as evidence for natural selection having impacted levels of  diversity and divergence.
This project aims to establish genome-wide patterns of diversity and divergence between several closely related, ecologically diverged wild tomato species. Of particular interest is the relative importance of various evolutionary processes that have shaped these patterns, such as demographic history, mutation, and natural selection. Understanding speciation processes is a central goal in population genetics and evolutionary biology, not least because they represent the origin of biodiversity. However, they are difficult to study in many natural systems because species often have diverged sufficiently to erode signatures of evolutionary processes that caused the initial divergence. Under a genealogical perspective, DNA sequence data from multiple genomic fragments contain footprints of speciesS demographic history and may reveal cases of interspecific gene flow during the process of divergence. Wild tomatoes are ideally suited for these purposes because of their recent divergence, diversity of mating systems, and valuable genomic resources that include a draft genome sequence. Three subprojects will be pursued that all rest on a common data set generated by sequencing 60 nuclear loci from seven wild tomato species. A major project goal is building a speciation/demographic model for the seven species: to what extent did these species experience changes in population size after divergence, and is there genomic evidence for speciation with ongoing gene flow? A second goal is to estimate the strength of correlation(s) between levels of nucleotide diversity, divergence to a non-tomato outgroup, and levels of recombination. Finally, we aim to identify genomic regions that show either elevated or reduced divergence among the focal tomato species, given their inferred demographic history. Nuclear genes from genomic regions of normal versus very low recombination rate will be sequenced with next-generation sequencing technology. Extensive analyses of the genome-wide sequence data and their comparison to results from computer simulations will provide reliable inferences on many aspects of the historical divergence process among the wild tomato species. Molecular evolutionary analyses of the sequence data will and Snegative selection on nucleotide diversity and assess the relative importance of Spositive ¸ T ¸ T divergence in linked regions, compared to neutral factors such as mutations and random genetic drift. Moreover, we can also test the potential role of suppressed recombination in facilitating divergence and the build-up of reproductive barriers between species. These issues are of fundamental evolutionary interest and can now be studied at a genome-wide scale.