  Investigation and Optimization of communication strategies against littering  
Littering causes avoidable costs and diminishes the aesthetic value of nature as well as of urban areas. In the transdisciplinary project together IGSU (Interest Group for a Clean Environment in Switzerland) research for the development of effective approaches to combat littering is conducted. 
Research objectives - Gaining a better understanding of the causes and psychological processes leading to littering behaviour. - Investigation of the effects of anti-littering messages communicated via media and of face-to face communication by SIGSU ¸ anti-littering ambassadorsT. - Developing a scientific knowledge base for the design of effective media and face-to-face communication strategies to counteract littering. Research activities, work-packages, and methods 1) Survey of school classes (completed in 2013) In a questionnaire study with pupils, the reasons for littering were examined from their perspective, and it was investigated which types of anti-littering slogans resonate best among youth. It was found that young people liked creative, witty and clearly understandable slogans and that such slogans were also judged by them to be effective. Provocative slogans and a commanding tone were, however not liked by young people (for results in detail, see project webpage). In view of the perceived reasons for littering a difference was found between the reasons provided for own littering behavior and the estimates for the reasons why other persons litter. For own littering deficiencies in infrastructure are blamed the most, while convenience or "laziness" is the most frequently cited reason for the littering of other people. Furthermore, "accidentally" is more often used as an explanation for own littering than for the littering of other people, which in turn is more often regarded as due to diverse reasons such as peer pressure, imitation, disrespect for the environment or trying to appear "cool". The causes attributed to littering by others thus appear to be socially less desirable or more negative than the reasons for own littering which partially resemble excuses or transferral of blame to others (for results in detail, see project webpage). - Evaluation of face-to-face communication by "IGSU anti-littering ambassadors" (ongoing) - Experimental investigation of effectiveness of anti-littering placards (ongoing) List of research Methods - Surveys, interviews, and field experiments c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> Project reports - Hansmann, R., Knoll, V. & Steimer, N. (2013). Studie zum Einfluss der Charakteristika von Anti-Littering Slogans auf ihre Beurteilung durch Schüler. Zurich: ETH Zürich Natural and Social Science Interface (NSSI) und IG saubere Umwelt (IGSU).