  DFT+DMFT investigation of epitaxially strained LaTiO3 and related materials  
Here we investigate the effect of epitaxial strain, which occurs in thin films  due to the lattice mismatch with the substrate material, on the electronic properties of Mott insulators such as LaTiO3 and LaVO3, and explore the possibility of strain-induced metal-insulator transitions.
In this project we will investigate the effect of epitaxial strain, which is caused in thin films by the mismatch of the lattice constants of the thin film material and the substrate, on the Mott-insulating behavior of LaTiO3 and related materials such as SrVO3 and LaVO3. In its bulk form LaTiO3 is a paramagnetic Mott insulator at room temperature. The insulating character is controlled by the structural distortion of the oxygen octahedra in the perovskite crystal structure (see attached figure), which reduces the Ti-O-Ti bond angle compared to the ideal value of 180 degrees. The amplitude of this distortion controls the magnitude of the electron hopping between adjacent Ti sites. If this hopping is sufficiently reduced (as is the case in LaTiO3) the on-site repulsion between electrons will block the movement of the electrons between different sites and the system becomes a Mott insulator. This has been demonstrated recently using a combination of density functional theory (DFT) and dynamical mean-field theory (DMFT) for the series SrVO3, CaVO3, LaTiO3, and YTiO3, where the distortion increases continuously from SrVO3 to YTiO3 [1]. On the other hand it is known that epitaxial strain in thin film materials can significantly alter the nature of the internal distortion of the oxygen network in perosvkite systems [2]. This poses the question of whether epitaxial strain can induce a metal-insulator transition or cause other interesting effects such as orbitally-selective Mott transitions, simply by altering the in-plane and out-of-plane TM-O-TM bond angles in different ways. Indeed metallic properties shave been observed experimentally in thin films of LaTiO3 grown on SrTiO3 [3]. To answer this question we will perform DFT+DMFT calculations similar to [1] for LaTiO3, but using realistic crystal structures that are obtained from accurate structural relaxations under different epitaxial constraints. These relaxations will be performed using standard density functional theory, while the electronic properties for these strained structures will then be obtained via dynamical mean-field theory. Our initial test calculations show that the standard generalized gradient approximation (GGA) is sufficient to obtain highly accurate structural parameters for LaTiO3. On the other hand, since conventional first principles methods such as GGA are fundamentally incapable of describing the Mott insulating state in LaTiO3 and similar compounds, a more advanced theoretical framework is required for the description of the resulting electronic properties. We will then extend our studies to other perovskite materials with formal electron configuration d1 or d2, such as SrVO3 and LaVO3, to explore whether strain-induced metal-insulator transitions can be found in these systems, and to gain a better understanding of the underlying physical mechanisms. E. Pavarini et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 176403 (2004). J. M. Rondinelli and N. A. Spaldin, Adv. Mater. 23, 3363 (2011). F. J. Wong et al., Phys. Rev. B 81, 161101(R) (2010). c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2>