  Linear Stability Analysis of BWRs (NACUSP Project)  
An analytical linear stability analysis tool is developed. This frequencydomain tool uses a 3D neutronics, a 1D thermohydraulic description for each bundle based on state-of-the-art thermohydraulic models, and full local coupling between thermohydraulics and neutronics.
This work is conducted within the frame of the 5th Framework EU project NACUSP. The general goal of NACUSP is to improve the economics of operating and future Boiling Water Reactors (BWR) through a better understanding and analysis of their stability limits. Instabilities in BWRs can be classified as: in-phase oscillations typically involving the entire internal-recirculation loop (in this case, all the parallel channels in the core oscillate in phase), and out-of-phase oscillations (their main characteristic is that different core channels or core regions oscillate out of phase). The next-generation reactors typically use large-size cores to produce higher power output as one of the key measures to reduce cost. As the core size increases, nuclear coupling between different parts of the core becomes weaker, and the core becomes more susceptible to out-of-phase (regional) oscillations. An analytical linear stability analysis tool will be developed at ETH to determine the stability thresholds. This frequency-domain tool will use a 3D representation for the neutronics in the core, a one-dimensional thermohydraulic description for each bundle or for groups of bundles at least, based on state-of-the-art thermohydraulic models (including description of transient conduction in the fuel rods), and local coupling between thermohydraulics and neutronics. The main advantage of a frequency-domain tool is that it is orders-of-magnitude faster than timedomain codes in determining the thresholds of stability and cannot suffer from numerical stability problems. This tool will be used to study various modes of oscillation and determine their causes. The code will be validated using a hierarchy of data: previously published and project-generated c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> stability data first for simple geometrical configurations (single and multiple channels) without neutronic coupling and finally with plant data available to the project partners.