  Polymeric nanocomposites: Preparation, Characterization and Applications  
We study and develop techniques for preparing polymer matrix/nanoparticle composites. The main objective is to understand how to disperse organic/inorganic nanoparticles in polymer matrices randomly homogeneously, avoiding their aggregation.
Polymer matrix/nanoparticle composites (PMNC), where the nanoparticles are dispersed randomly and homogeneously in the polymer matrix, have received great attention recently due to the possibility of improving the mechanical, thermal, optical and barrier properties in comparison to the pure polymer. However, nanoscale particles tend to form aggregates, and it is very difficult, if not of a given polymer with the desired impossible in many cases, to create mixtures (Scompounds ¸ T) particles in which the particles are individually and homogeneously dispersed. The nanoparticles or clusters as a consequence of depletion forces acting between individual particles form Sclouds ¸ T in the melt or a solution of linear polymers. The goal of this project is to understand how one can avoid such depletion induced aggregation during the preparation of PMNC. Starting the polymerization with a suspension of particles in a suitable monomer seems to be a possibility avoiding the aggregation of nanoparticles. This method is known as in-situ polymerization and allows high rate of polymerization, but aggregation of particles were also observed in many cases. We will investigate the process of in-situ polymerization of dispersions of various nanoparticles in different monomers (e.g methyl methacrylate, styrene, butyl acrylate, ect) to better understand how to avoid particle aggregation. The properties of resulting composite material will be examined, and the effects of particles on both the process of polymerization and the properties of final products will be studied. The employed measurement techniques are dynamic and static light scattering, surfactant adsorption isotherm, differential scanning calorimetry, optical and mechanical properties tests and microscopy combined with image analysis.