  Teaching physics with the use of formative assessment and adequate feedback 
Formative assessment is an integral part of an instruction. It provides the  teacher with information which can be used during the instructional segment in which the assessment occurred. It helps to adjust the instruction with the intension of better meeting the needs of the students.
We distinguish two fundamentally different types of assessment. Summative assessment tests the outcome of learning and is typically used for grading. Formative assessment is an integral part of an instruction. It provides the teacher with information which can be used during the instructional segment in which the assessment occurred. It helps to adjust the instruction with the intension of better meeting the needs of the students. Formative assessment in combination with adequate feedback allows the learner to identify his status in respect with the learning goals and to adjust his learning behaviour (Quellmalz & Pellegrino 2009). For an overview about classroom assessment and feedback related to assessment see SAssessment ¸ and Classroom LearningT by Paul Black and Dylan Wiliam (Black & Wiliam 1998; 2004). Black and Wiliam focus on the interaction between teacher and learner. They state that substantial learning gains can be achieved in a classroom setting where formative assessment with feedback to the learner is used in combination with systematic remedial learning work of the students themselves. From the perspective of the learner the introduction of formative assessment with feedback shifts the emphasis from grading towards understanding. This shift of goals could require a revision of (Perrenoud 1991) which allows in its present form learners to neglect a the Slearning ¸ contractT subject and to compensate this. When formative assessment with feedback is used, learning de learners would constantly be ficits are detected and communicated on a regular basis. SPassive ¸ T reminded of their lack in understanding. This could lead to tension within the class room which can be avoided by renegotiating the learning contract and by clearly communicating the learning goals, the assessment criteria and the expected reflective habit of mind required in classes and in subsequent university courses as well. Tools of formative assessment are developed within this project for the use in Swiss "Gymnasium" classes. Black P. and Wiliam D, Assessment in Education, 5, 7 - 74 (1998). 21 (2004). Black P. and Wiliam D, Phi Delta Kappan, 86, 9 U in Assessment of PupilsS Perrenoud P, STowards ¸ a pragmatic approach to formative evaluationT Achievment: Motivation and School Success, edited by P. Weston, Amsterdam, Swets and Zeitlin 101 (1991). ger, 79 U 79 (2009). Quellmalz E.S. and Pellegrino J.W, Science, 323, 75 U