  In vitro tests and molecular tools for detection and characterization of probiotic bacteria in the gut microbiota 
The intestinal microbiota comprises hundreds of different types of microorganisms. We work on the development and application of advanced molecular techniques which are of crucial importance for the assessment of interaction between bacteria and the elucidation of the functionality of the intestinal
The gastrointestinal tract of human harbours a large and complex collection of micro-organisms, which forms a large part of the normal microbiota of healthy human. We know that this complex ecosystem has a significant impact on human health and disease through their involvement in the nutrition, pathogenesis and immune function of the host. Different strategies such as probiotics or prebiotics consumption have then been proposed in order to improve the intestinal microbial balance. However, our knowledge of the intestinal bacterial composition and the understanding of interactions occurring in this community are far from complete. In recent years, the application of molecular tools to the study of the bacterial ecosystem has confirmed our poor knowledge of the microbial diversity and the abundance of uncultivable microbes in intestinal samples. Molecular taxonomic tools based on 16S rRNA gene sequences comparison have allowed a phylogenic classification of fecal isolates and a better description of their diversity. Culture-independent techniques such as PCR-related methods, temperature or denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (T/DGGE) and terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism (T-RFLP) analysis have been used to assess the diversity and the modification of the gut microbiota. Several quantitative techniques (Dot-Blot, 16S rRNA probe hybridization, quantitative PCR, real time PCR etc...) have also been proposed for the follow-up of intestinal bacteria. Molecular techniques applied to the characterization of bacterial activities are also emerging. Quick, reliable and efficient methods are needed for molecular identification and quantification of bacterial genera and species in the complex gut microbiota, but also for the follow up of targeted bacterial activities from commensal as well as probiotic bacteria. In this project we work on the development and validation of molecular techniques (mainly Fluorescent in Situ Hybridization [FISH], QRT-PCR, flow cytometry, radioactivity and immunological tests), which are of crucial importance for the assessment of interaction between bacteria and the elucidation of the functionality of the intestinal microbiota. The application of molecular techniques will be applied to our new in vitro model for colonic fermentation with the immobilized cell technology.