  Advanced Distributed Learning (ADL)  
The ADL project fosters the development of e-learning. The research focus lies on self-paced learning, without a real-life tutor, in pure computer-to-learner situations, any time and anywhere. This project has a special focus on the international SCORM standard, learning paths, and authoring issues.
The Authoring in Advanced Distributed Learning Project is an e-learning project. Advanced Distributed Learning is defined as a structured learning endeavor that takes place anywhere and at any time it is needed or desired. This has consequences on The primary research focus lies on Shuman ¸ to machine interactionT. the didactic concepts, on the learning content, and on the information technologies: the project focuses on content authoring, learning paths, and the concepts behind the idea of re-usable learning objects Sto ¸ provide access to education and training that can be tailored to individual needs and ADL is about the didactics of self-studiying, delivered cost effectively, anywhere and at any timeT; and the interaction with further user roles such as tutors or instructors are not included in the primary research focus. The project works with software tools and sample learning objects that use the SCORM stan- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> dard, so a further research focus lies in learning object contextualization issues and the so-called DSCORM ilitiesS ¸ (reusability, affordability, interoperability, durability, accessibility). Here, a special focus is given on issues such as the learning path, and the authoring of learning content that can be used by many schools within many teaching environments. Furthermore, the tailoring of educational content to individual student implies a certain move towards computer-controlled learning management. The idea is to develop a learning management system that is able to help students find the course content suitable to their wishes and needs, and to present such content in the correct form and sequence, eventually even to make suggestions for further steps in the studentsS learning processes.