  Chemistry of mass transfer processes related to the formation of metamorphic veins 
This project investigates the fluid chemistry and mechanisms of mass  transfer in metamorphic vein systems in the Rhenish Massif (Germany) by combination of field and fluid inclusion studies, isotope geochemistry and geochemical modeling.
Introduction Formation of metamorphic quartz veins in compressional orogens is generally related to crustal fluid flow at variable scales (small to large scale) and intense fluid-rock interaction processes. Conventional geochemical models of vein formation commonly assume that the vein fillings precipitate in response to changes in pressure-temperature conditions or through reactions of the metamorphic fluids with the surrounding wall rocks. Chemical changes in series of progressively altered wall rocks have been used to develop semi-quantitative models of mass transfer during fluid-rock interaction. These models are semi-quantitative, because they do not consider the full amount of material enriched or depleted in alterations halos, nor do they consider the absolute amount of material precipiated withing the veins. Consequently, conventional geochemical models are not able to fully quantify the net mass transfer during fluid-rock interaction and to link this information with thermodynamic calculations of complex fluid-rock equilibria. Aims The principal aims of the study are to improve our understanding of the chemical processes that drive the formation of metamorphic veins in compressional orogens. Most importantly, we want to see if the processes of vein formation are dominantly controlled by the chemistry and flux rates of external fluids or by the chemical potential gradients imposed by local host rocks. Workplan During the first stage (years 1-3) of the proposed project we will build a 3D geochemical model of the alteration envelope that surrounds metamorphic quartz veins. This model will be based on field-based studies of well-exposed metamorphic quartz vein systems in the Hunsrück-Taunus area (Rhenish Massif, Germany). Through detailed image analysis, 3D sampling and geochemical analysis of both the veins and the surrounding alteration envelopes, we will be able to fully quantify the mass transfer during the formation of the veins. This mass transfer analysis will be applied to major and trace components and to oxygen and hydrogen isotopes. Based on this 3D analysis, we will be able to develop a considerably improved geochemical model of vein formation. Most importantly, the 3D analysis will allow us to quantify how much quartz and other principal veinfilling minerals were locally derived (from the surrounding alteration halo) and how much must have been supplied through external fluids. Equipped with such an improved quantitative model of mass transfer, the major focus of the project will be on thermodynamic calculation of fluid-rock equilibria to quantitatively model the chemical processes of vein formation and its feedback on vein growth and metamorphic fluid flow. This modeling will benefit from previous development of improved thermodynamic models for fluid-rock equilibria at elevated temperatures and pressures that combine aqueous speciation with non-ideal mineral solid-solutions. The second stage of the project (years 4-6) will then involve a full direct coupling of numerical models of mechanical, fluid flow and chemical processes and its application to formation of metamorphic veins. This will c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> be mainly achieved by integrating the GEM-Selektor and ELLE codes with an appropriate model for fluid transport. This code coupling will greatly benefit from the code improvements that were achieved during the first 3 years. In addition, it it planned to directly integrate models for isotope equilibria into the geochemical-thermodynamic model, because stable isotopes such as oxygen and hydrogen are commonly applied as tracers of fluid-rock interaction.