  Quantum phase transitions and scaling in low-dimensional and frustrated spin systems. 
Neutron scattering, muon spin rotation spectroscopy and bulk methods are used to experimentally investigate quantum critical phenomena in disordered, low-dimensional and geometrically frustrated spin systems. Particular attention is given to quantum phase transitions induced by magnetic fields.
Quantum critical point (QCP) is a zero temperature phase transition between quantum ground states. In vicinity of QCP universal behaviors are predicted that are independent of the microscopic details of the system and depend only on the symmetry of the order parameter, dimensionality of the system and interaction range within the system. For the study of pure one-dimensional quantum systems we use 2Dioxane° u2H_2O° uCuCl_2 [1], a metal-organic s=1/2 Heisenberg antiferromagnetic chain compound which maps onto the Luttinger liquid QCP. Such system fails to develop long-range Neel ordering even at the lowest temperatures and has exceptional dynamical properties. Our experimental work is concentrated at verifying ~ by inelastic the scaling universality of temperature scaled dynamic structure factor: T° uS(E,Pi) E/T neutron scattering [2]. Dioxane° u2H_2O° uCuCl_2 is an excellent model system since, firstly it can be magnetized by moderate magnetic fields which is expected to create an experimentally detectable asymmetry in scaling relations. Secondly, the Cl concentration can be arbitrarily tuned by Br substitution giving dramatic changes in the strength of superexchange coupling which opens up a possibility to study the effect of disorder. The uniqueness of one-dimensional physics is that collisions between counter-propagating particles becomes unavoidable and leads to collapse of Landau Fermi Liquid in 1D conductors and of long range order in gapless spin chains, as in 2Dioxane° u2H_2O° uCuCl_2. However in gapped quantum spin liquids, such as Haldane spin chains or spin ladders the picture changes and quasiparticles (magnons) persist down to zero temperature since mutual collisions are rare due to their exponentially small density. Our second test sample is a S=1/2 gapped spin ladder system (CH3)2CHNH3CuCl3 (IPA-CuCl3, where IPA denotes isopropyl ammonium) which maps into quasi-one-dimensional Haldane spin-1 chain. IPACuCl3 can be driven to quantum critical point by applying external magnetic field H_c = 9.5T at which system undergoes quantum phase transition to a Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC) of magnons. Critical indices, emergence of the Goldstone mode, behavior of gap energies have been found to be universal to BEC in a dilute Bose gas [3]. Recent theoretical progress has resulted in predictions for the evolution of the dynamic spectrum of the Bose gas across the quantum critical point at nonzero temperatures [4] which we have set out to verify experimentally by inelastic neutron scattering. Yet another test sample is a one dimensional bond alternating Heisenberg spin-1 chain [Ni(N,N'bis(3-aminopropyl) propane-1,3-diamine) (m-NO2)](ClO4) alias NTENP. Theory predicts that Heisenberg spin-1 chain undergoes a quantum phase transition at H_c from a gapped spin-liquid c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> phase to a gapless Luttinger liquid [5]. In NTENP the transition to Luttinger liquid phase has been identified experimentally [6] at H_c=8.98T with field parallel to chains and H_c=11.7T with field perpendicular to chain axis. If interactions between the magnons were absent, the transition at Hc could be understood as a BoseUEinstein condensation of magnons. In the spin-1 Heisenberg chain there is an interaction between magnons, which fundamentally changes the ground state for H > H_c from a condensate of bosonic magnons to a Luttinger liquid, which can be regarded as a one-dimensional version of an interacting Bose condensate. The transition at H=H_c is in the universality class of the commensurateUincommensurate phase transition and for H very close to H_c this maps onto Ising critical behavior with critical exponents z=1 and =1. At criticality (T=0) the structure factor exhibits a power-law behavior and in the critical high T continuum phase (T>0) temperature dependent dynamic structure factor is known theoretically [7] which we intend to verify within current project. T. Hong, et al. PRB 80, 132404 (2009) H. J. Schulz, PRB 34, 6372 (1980) A. Zheludev, et al. PRB 76, 054450 (2007) S. Sachdev, E.R. Dunkel, PRB 73, 085116 (2006) I. Affleck, F.D.M. Haldane, PRB36 5291 (1987) M. Hagiwara et al. AIP CP850 Low Temp. Phys. 24th Int. Conf. on LTP 1043 (2006) S. Sachdev, Quantum Phase Transitions, Cambridge University Press (1999)