  OMLETH: A Platform for Location-Based Mobile Learning at ETH  
In the Innovedum project OMLETH ("Ortsbezogenes Mobiles Lernen an der ETH Zürich"), a generic platform for location-based mobile learning will be developed. The platform will enable lecturers to easily create location-based learning modules which will be accessible to students in a mobile app.
Courses in many study programs at ETH Zurich feature learning content which is related to places in the real world. This applies especially to Architecture, Civil Engineering, and System-Oriented Natural Sciences. Teaching this content in the classroom often remains decoupled and distant from the typical working environment of the respective discipline. From research on location-based mobile learning it is well-known that teaching such content at the respective location with mobile technologies can improve the learning effect by complementing conventional didactical methods. Due to a lack of platforms enabling an easy use of these location-based mobile learning concepts a broad adoption of location-based mobile learning in university teaching has not taken place yet. In the OMLETH project ("Ortsbezogenes Mobiles Lernen an der ETH Zürich"), we are planning to develop a generic platform for location-based mobile learning. This platform will be evaluated during one semester with students and lecturers of one selected ETH course. The platform should enable lecturers to easily create location-based learning modules with a web-based interface. The created learning modules will be available to students in a mobile "App" supporting them during individual learning sessions and excursions. OMLETH will be built by using the concepts of an existing prototypical, purely web-based elearning system for location-based content, developed at the Chair for Geoinformation Engineering. It is intended to enable new didactical concepts and should close the gap between the theoretical learning of place-related teaching content, and the direct experience at the respective location.