  COST TU0601: Assessment and Determination of Robustness of Structures  
The principal objective of this research project is to develop a theoretical and methodological framework for the assessment and quantification of structural robustness and its various indicators. 
The awareness of the significance of robustness of structures has gradually intensified over the years due to experiences with failure and collapse of many structures. A significant amount of research has been invested into the various aspects of robustness resulting in a number of useful recommendations on how to achieve robust structures. However, despite many significant theoretical, methodical and technological advances, structural robustness is still an issue of controversy and poses difficulties with regard to its interpretation as well as regulation. Requirements for robustness in structural design are still not substantiated in clear detail and nor has the engineering profession been able to agree on an interpretation of robustness which facilitates its quantification. The principal objective of this research project is to develop a theoretical and methodological framework for the assessment and quantification of structural robustness and its various indicators. Further optimal and acceptable criteria for robustness based on considerations of risk and rational decision making would be evolved and established for different scenarios. The focus would also be on the design and modelling of relevant measures and guidelines for ensuring and improving robustness levels in new and existing structures. Finally, a probabilistic model code would be created to guide the assessment of robustness of structures during the structural design and assessment/reassessment phases. This research project is being conducted in association with the COST (European COoperation in the field of Scientific and Technical Research) Action TU0601 on SRobustness ¸ of StructuresT. The COST Action will provide a structured platform for international experts to critically discuss and analyse the progress and results from the research project and hence contribute positively to the overall impact and relevance of the project. The achievements of the research project are expected to provide immense benefits to the engineering design community as well as the society in general.