  Karbi Anglong Corridor: Participatory modeling and integrated landscape approaches for conservation and development in Assam (India)  
The Karbi Anglong forests form the basis of livelihoods of farmers practicing Jhum. They also serve as refuge for wildlife, including highly endangered species. We aim to help balance sustainable agriculture with conservation in a participatory manner, using the LEK  framework and Commod approach.
Context. Slash and Burn, also known as shifting cultivation, is one of the most ancient forms of natural resource management. Patches of land are cleared and used for agricultural production for a few years before a new area is cleared. With plenty of land available and long fallows, the system is sustainable, with soil fertility and ecological diversity remaining high (Brady, 1996). Problems arise when land becomes scarce, and the fallow periods shorten. Intervention is needed as the interactions between the ecological processes and the livelihood strategies developed by the farmers to meet their needs send the local socio-ecological system in a downward trajectory of depletion of natural capital and increased vulnerability of the stakeholders (Pfund 2000). However, top down sectorial national policies with poor understanding of the drivers often tend to increase the social and environmental costs of this transition (Cramb et al. 2009). The Karbi Anglong Hills in Assam, India, offer refuge for the flagship and threatened species (Tiger, Asian Rhino, Asian Elephant, Wild Water Buffalo and Eastern Swamp Deer, among others) of Kaziranga National Park (a UNESCO world heritage site) during the monsoon floods.. The combination of slash-and-burn by local farmers and increased population pressure has raised concerns on the sustainability of the system and its capacity to continue sustaining the livelihoods of the hill tribes and at the same time offer refuge for the wildlife (GoA, 2005). In order for the landscape to accommodate this apparently conflicting objectives, a better understanding of the drivers of land use change is essential, grounded in a sound understanding of the local empirical knowledge. Only then can possible alternative natural resource management strategies be explored. Project Goals and Objectives. The studySs general research objective is to draw lessons on how to design, implement and replicate an adaptive management strategy for slash and burn landscapes based on (1) the assessment and elicitation of Local Ecological Knowledge, and (2) an integrated model coupling social and environmental layers developed through participatory modelling approaches explicitly building on the local knowledge system. Specifically the project will aim at the identification of locally relevant development objectives, helping stakeholders in the slopes of the Karbi Anglong Hills to formulate and explore alternative livelihood futures, helping to better balance their development needs with the conservation objectives of the government, ensuring food security for the upland tribal communities and improving connectivity between the wetlands and the forests. In pursuing the general research objective, the PhD candidate will: (1) Test whether or not Local Ecological Knowledge on slash and burn cultivation transcends caste and ethnic boundaries, (2) Weight the perceived impacts of socio political drivers of change against those of biophysical and agronomic constraints that shape the landscape dynamics of the Karbi Anglong Hills; and (3) Assess the appreciation of the participatory modelling process by the stakeholders involved against the perceived usefulness of both the models and the scenarios generated. Methods. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> One of the pillars of our study is the Local Ecological Knowledge (LEK) framework. We choose to adopt the definition of LEK as the knowledge people in a particular locality have about their environment (Sinclair & Joshi 2000). We refer to empirical knowledge obtained through the accumulation of observations and experiences independently of cultural affiliations. We al recognizing that what farmers do and know so distinguish between knowledge and practice U are very different things (Walker et al. 1999). The Agroecological Knowledge Toolkit (AKT http://akt.bangor.ac.uk/ ) will be used as the protocol to identify, elicit and gather LEK, from farmers and scientists alike. From an understanding of the socio-ecological system, we will then explore alternative land management strategies using the Companion Modeling (ComMod) approach. ComMod is a participatory modelling approach to natural resources management that has been designed to address specifically the challenges associated with models build around social and environmental drivers (Campo et al. 2010). The foundation of ComMod is the willingness to incorporate on equal footing the multiple and often conflicting viewpoints of the stakeholders involved in the management of natural resources, in order to make the model meaningful for all stakeholders. Maybe more importantly, this process will build trust between the research team and the stakeholders and strengthen confidence on the model. Through workshops facilitated by the researcher, the stakeholders will collectively decide and organise the knowledge they consider relevant for the problem at stake. Expected Results. The project will deliver scientific outputs that can make direct contributions to applications in conservation policy and management research, but also to the real-world setting. For example, the Kaziranga policy makers envision the rehabilitation of the lands through Sinnovative ¸ community based afforestation / agroforestry schemes, with the forest department as the nodal agency to ensu but these modalities are yet to be implemented or even defined (GoA, re primacy of conservationT, 2005). References. Brady, N. C. 1996. Alternatives to slash-and-burn: a global imperative. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 58:3-11. Campo, P. C., F. Bousquet, and T. R. Villanueva. 2010. Modelling with stakeholders within a development project. Environmental Modelling & Software 25:1302-1321. Cramb, R., C. Colfer, W. Dressler, P. Laungaramsri, Q. Le, E. Mulyoutami, N. Peluso, and R. Wadley. 2009. Swidden Transformations and Rural Livelihoods in Southeast Asia. Human Ecology 37:323-346. Government of Assam. 2005. Assam Forest Policy 2004. Pages Government of Assam (GoA) 2005 Assam Forest Policy 2004, Department of Environment and Forests Government of Assam, Guwahati. 2050 pp. in D. o. E. a. F. G. o. Assam, editor, Guwahati. Pfund, J-L. 2000. Culture sur brûlis et gestion des ressources naturelles: (évolution et perspectives de trois terroirs ruraux du versant est de Madagascar). Ecole polytechnique fédérale de Zürich, Groupe de foresterie pour le développement, Zürich, Suisse. Sinclair, F. L., and L. Joshi. 2000. Taking local knowledge about trees seriously. Pages 47-64 in A. Lawrence, editor. Forestry, forest users and research: new ways of learning. European Tropical Forest Research Network, Wageningen, Netherlands. Walker, D. H., P. J. Thorne, F. L. Sinclair, B. Thapa, C. D. Wood, and D. B. Subba. 1999. A systems approach to comparing indigenous and scientific knowledge: consistency and discriminatory power of indigenous and laboratory assessment of the nutritive value of tree fodder. Agricultural c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> Systems 62:87-103.