  Uncertainty in Science 

 Despite its great achievements, science is not always able to provide us with certain knowledge in terms of robust predictions about the future development of highly complex systems such as the global climate, flu pandemics or economic crises, to name just a few. Nevertheless policy-makers rely heavily on scientific results. Accordingly, the handling of uncertainty as well as the way in which scientific uncertainties are communicated to the public is becoming increasingly crucial. Misunderstandings regarding the limitations and fallibility of scientific results are quite often the source of misinterpretations about the nature of science in general. It is therefore of great importance to clarify what scientists mean when they sometimes admit that their results are not absolutely certain. Although the issue of uncertainty is a widely discussed topic in various scientific disciplines, a coherent and comprehensive philosophical theory of uncertainty in science is still missing. This project aims at a classification of different kinds of scientific uncertainties against the background of a model of predictions in science. The working hypothesis of the project holds that we can distinguish at least three genuine kinds of uncertainty in science each affecting another step within the prediction process: 1) Statistical uncertainty (due to the imprecision of data used in the prediction), 2) Theoretical uncertainty (due to fundamental errors in the theories or models underlying the prediction, and 3) Ontological uncertainty (due to the non-deterministic behaviour of the system under scrutiny). To be sure, the third kind of uncertainty is the most interesting one from a philosophical point of view, since it is not clear at all whether it makes sense to speak of Snon¸ in the first place. Rather, the non-deterministic or chance-like behaviour deterministic systemsT that we sometimes seem to find in nature must be seen as a feature of the theoretical descriptions that we apply in these cases. Then the question arises how to interpret non-deterministic theories (e.g. quantum mechanics which is at least partially indeterministic). The project also analyses role might play in this context. that the old philosophical concept of Spotentiality ¸ T