  New Analysis Methods for Corrugated Laminates  
Our research addresses questions of the understanding of the mechanical behavior, the mechanical modeling, and design of corrugated laminates made from fiber-reinforced plastics.  New mechanical and structural models are needed for answering the questions and simulating the structural response.
Anisotropy, apparently a material property, can be traced back to geometry. The geometric effects of sheet corrugation transform global membrane strains transvers to the corrugations into local bending deformations, creating high compliance as well as large-strain capabilities. Along the corrugations, the bending stiffness is dramatically increased. Corrugated sheets can reach much higher degrees of anisotropy than any fiber-reinforced plastic material. The high bending stiffness along the one direction was used in earlier epochs for providing buckling strength of wing and fuselage skins, without the need for further stiffening elements, for aircraft such as the Ju52. A current research field, aiming at more efficient aircraft design, is the morphing wing. It can replace the traditional system of aps and slats, for controlling the aerodynamic properties, with compliant structures providing aerodynamically more efficient airfoil shapes in all flight situations. Some morphing wing concepts rely on flexible skins. Corrugated laminates are excellent candidate materials for these: they can provide large deformability along the chord direction and at the same time high membrane as well as bending stiffness along the span direction, adding to the required high structural stiffness at low weight in airplane design. Our research addresses questions of the understanding of the mechanical behavior, the mechanical modeling, and design of corrugated laminates made from fiber-reinforced plastics. Loading along the global membrane direction perpendicular to the corrugations causes interlaminar stressing, which is in contrast to at laminates. The strain-force response to large stretches is highly nonlinear. Modeling by use of commercial finite-element method (FEM) software leads to enormous computational costs if the considered structure contains many periods of the corrugation pattern and the laminate consists of many layers. Hence there is a need for substitute-plate models to reduce mesh size as well as models for calculating the internal distributions for stresses and strains. The models found in the literature provide only incomplete sets of substitute stiffness values. The more complete models, respecting all basic equations of linear elasticity, stem from our own preliminary research. Our analytical model provides closed-form solutions for the distribution of displacements, strains, and stresses as well as for the entries of the homogenized ABD matrix of a cross-ply laminate. Its limitation is the underlying thin-shell assumption. Our numerical model is based on the finite-element method and provides displacements, three-axial strains and stresses, and the homogenized ABD matrix of a general laminate. Its numerical efficiency is due to the unit-cell approach, modeling only one period of the corrugation pattern, and the realization of a generalized-plane strain state where the respective finite-element formulation is not found in general-purpose software. The new research project addresses remaining research needs. We have understood how the analytical model can be formulated to be applicable to general laminates, even though it will remain restricted to thin-shell theory. It and the dedicated FEM model will be extended to account for free strains such as caused by manufacturing or other temperature changes. The FEM model will be c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> further extended so that it can simulate geometric nonlinearity which is necessary for investigating the structural response to large prescribed strains. After finishing the modeling and programming work, parametric studies will be performed to better understand the mechanical behavior of corrugated laminates under the aspects of interlaminar stressing and other through-the-thickness effects, and the response to large strains, which will occur in flexible-skin applications. The results of the studies will enable us to assess the opportunities for the use of corrugated structures in smart material applications, which activity will conclude the project.