  Solar Radio Astronomy 
The project focuses on the development of a broadband Fast-Fourier-  Transform radio spectrometer using fast digital samplers and large FPGA chips in collaboration with Acqiris SA, Genf. The spectrometers can be used both for high-sensitivity solar and star formation research.
Magnetic energy and its thermalization have an important impact on the present heliosphere, and they did even more so in the remote past of the solar system. Accelerated particles and extremely hot plasma that result from flares are manifestations of energy release in magnetic reconnection events. The physics of this fundamental process in the universe is not understood, nor its start and role in star and planet formation. High-energy flare radiations and energetic particles are believed to have an essential impact on the chemical composition and evolution of protoplanetary disks. The emission of UV and X-rays greatly accelerates the protonization process, producing chemistry very different from interstellar clouds, such as efficient channels for the formation of H2O. This project focuses on solar flare research, but includes the preparation of the ground for an application in the field of star formation. We propose hardware and software developments, observations, interpretation and theory. The financially most substantial part, however, concerns the development of three broadband Fast-Fourier-Transform radio spectrometers using fast digital samplers and large FPGA chips. The spectrometers can be used both for high-sensitivity solar flare observations in the decimeter range in our own observatory in Bleien as well as for observations of molecular lines of star forming regions at millimeter and submillimeter observatories. The novel type of spectrometer proposed is emerging from our instrumental developments for solar radio spectrometry (in particular ARGOS) supported by SNSF. A technological qualification model is currently developed as a KTI project with a company in Geneva. Furthermore, we propose improvements of the Bleien radio telescopes, which will keep Phoenix-2 the leading spectrometer in the decimeter wavelength range and enhance the scientific return of the RHESSI satellite.