  S pacesDocumentaries  
The documentary movie series S_SpacesS (2011 onward) attempts to re-  member and learn from the use of architecture and its social role in informal settlements. While their physical buildings and infrastructure need to be upgraded or replaced, social networks and cultural values require to be studied.
Addis Ababa, the capital of Ethiopia, might double its population of four million inhabitants within three decades as a result of rural-urban migration and natural growth (United Nations 2012). In 2011, the housing shortage of roughly 700,000 units drove the city administration to announce ´ ´ a definition that plans to redevelop all SinformalS and SunplannedS parts of the city by 2020 U accounts for 80% of the citySs building stock. Tabula rasa clearings of big parts of the inner city were the immediate effect; whole neighbourhoods disappearing over night. While living and teaching architecture in Addis Ababa at that time, we felt the strong need to document the existing city to remember and learn from the use of architecture and its social role ´ in informal settlements. The documentary movie series S_SpacesS initially started as a teaching tool for students of architecture and urban planning at the Ethiopian Institute of Architecture, Building Construction and City Development (EiABC) and the ETH Zurich / Future Cities Laboratory Singapore. Throughout the last 2 years, however, the cinematic research project developed into ´ an important part of the Future Cities Laboratory Synergy project SAddis 2050S. Visualizing the need for and possibility of alternatives to the on-going demolition of the city, the series may help to protect both the history and the income of inhabitants throughout this upgrading process. ´ SDisappearing SpacesS, the first movie in the series, depicts the use of space in a single kebele house. During the span of 24 hours, this single room serves all necessary functions, transforming from kitchen to study, living room or bedroom for its inhabitants, simply by the relocation of furniture or the redefinition of boundaries. Unquestionably, the physical buildings and infrastructure of most informal settlements need to be upgraded or replaced. However, the social networks or spatial and cultural values, which are developed and embedded within these areas, require study and preservation and can become a basis for the re-development. Built by their users, such spaces redefine private and public boundaries, their connection to the ground, and the influence of utilities. Today, the series consists out of six documentary movies, addressing different specific themes of urbanity in Addis Ababa:(Disappearing Spaces (space use in informal housing), Emerging Spaces (adaptation of formal housing) , Originating Spaces (rural-urban migration), Supporting Spaces (informal economies), Recycling Spaces (informal recycling processes) and Materializing Spaces (illegal housing construction).(Recent public screenings include the AFRITECTURE Exhibition at the Pinakothek der Moderne in Munich, Germany, the Imagine Film Festival in Florence, Italy, lecture series at the Alliance Francaise, the Goethe Institute and the EiABC in Addis Ababa, the ETH Zurich and the FCL Midterm Review Exhibition.