  Quantum Wires Grown by OMCVD on Non-planar Substrates  

In the first phase of a collaboration between the institute of micro- and optoelectronics  (IMO) in Lausanne (EPFL) and the institute of quantum electronics (IQE) in Zurich (ETHZ), a systematic investigation of the structural and optical properties of GaAs/AlGaAs quantum wires grown by low pressure (20 mbar) organo metallic chemical vapor deposition (OMCVD) on V-grooved substrates was launched. The preparation of substrates and the characterization of the grown samples were carried out in Lausanne, while the growth was performed at the OMCVD facility in Zurich. The self-ordering characteristics of the formation of these wires were established by analyzing the growth evolution using cross-sectional transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images. The growth front of the AlGaAs near the bottom of the groove was found to be self-limiting, in the sense that, after growth of a sufficiently thick AlGaAs layer, it reaches a shape which does not change upon further AlGaAs growth (until planarization is achieved). The self-limiting surface profile is accurately fitted with a hyperbola. Thus it can be characterized by two parameters, chosen as the angle q between the asymptotes of the hyperbola and the radius of curvature r at the bottom of the groove. The self-limiting radius of curvature rsl depends on the Al content and the growth conditions. Comparison between structures grown at 20mbar (low pressure, LP) and at a pressure regime between 150-800 mbar ("athmospheric" pressure regime, AP) has shown that such low pressure growth considerably improves the structural quality of the QWRs, as compared with AP. In particular, we observed a substantial decrease (about 30%) in rsl, more abrupt interfaces (with interfaces defined within 1-2 monolayers), and distinct faceting, especially at the upper (GaAs) boundary of the QWRs. We have identified a central (100) plane surrounded by {311}A and, further out, {111}A facets. The effect of the growth temperature T and the Al mole fraction x in the barriers on the growth profile was studied, both at AP and LP; in both cases rsl and qsl increase with increasing T and decreasing x. In addition, at higher T and lower x, rsl increases more rapidly upon QWR deposition and relaxes more slowly with AlGaAs regrowth. This information is useful for designing and fabricating QWR structures of desired size and subband structure in this material system. Complementary we developed a technique for cross-sectional atomic force microscopy (AFM) characterization of semiconductor heterostructures in air, particularly useful for rapid imaging the rather complicated QWR heterostructures produced in this study. This method is based on the possibility of achieving a contrast between compound semiconductor layers of different compositions (e.g., AlGaAs of different Al mole fraction) due to the dependence of the oxidation rate on composition. For the case of GaAs/AlGaAs heterostructures, a special calibration sample consisting of alternating GaAs and AlGaAs layers of different compositions was grown. The cleaved surface topography was then measured as a function of oxidation time, providing a calibration of oxide height versus Al mole fraction. The technique has been successfully used to image GaAs/AlGaAs QWRs. We compared cross sectional TEM images with the corresponding AFM ones, and obtained a good agreement for the dimensions of the GaAs layers, with an uncertainty of 0.5nm in the lateral dimension of the layers, probably due to lateral oxide growth. The most important advantage of this new analysis technique is in the chemical composition information it provides with nm spatial resolution. We have used it to analyse the structure of the AlGaAs VQW structures grown by LP-OMCVD. The self-ordering mechanism of the c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> GaAs/AlGaAs QWRs is closely related to the self ordering of the AlGaAs VQWs at the centre of the grooves. The kinetically limited LP-OMCVD also yields much more sharply defined VQW structures. Three distinct VQW branches are visible, the central one related to the bottom (100) facet, while the two lateral ones stem from the {311}A facets. The separation between the branches depends on T and x in the same way as rsl. The fact that the branches of the VQW consist of a Ga-rich layer laterally bounded by AlGaAs with a higher Al content was established by our AFM crosssectional imaging technique. We observe a clear contrast due to difference in oxide height between the core and the claddings of the VQW structure. The lateral resolution is sufficient for resolving the two outer branches of the VQW.We have also used AFM techniques to characterize the morphology of the top surface of the GaAs V-groove QWRs after growth, cool-down and oxidation in air, with a height resolution below 0.1 nm and a lateral resolution around 1 nm. On the (100) ridges between the grooves, we observe atomically smooth terraces separated by monolayer steps. Far away from the grooved part of the wafer, the spacing and orientation of these steps depend on initial substrate miscut and growth parameters. However, within a diffusion length from the groove edge, the monolayer steps are ordered perpendicular to the groove edge. This step ordering can be explained by "absorption" of the surface atoms at the groove boundary, which results in the step alignment normal to the boundary. The low-temperature PL-linewidth of the QWR-peak ranges from 5.5 to 10 meV for all the samples investigated. These linewidths are considerably smaller as compared with those of similar wires grown by AP-OMCVD, reflecting their better interface quality. Two remarkable features that are specific to 1D quantum structures can be seen in low temperature (8k) PLE spectra: The emergence of several peaks with quasi-constant energy separations and a strong polarization anisotropy in the PLE signal. Based on theoretical calculations we were able to assign the peaks appearing in the parallel polarization excitation to the optical interband transitions between conduction and heavy hole valence 1D-subbands with identical quantum numbers. Optical anisotropy is observed in all samples. In summary we improved structural and optical properties of quantum wires grown by low pressure OMCVD. The relation between these properties and the growth parameter enables us in the future to grow more sophisticated structures useful to study the optical and transport properties of electronic carriers in these type of 1-dimensional structures.