  The Hyperdatabase Vision  

In the past twenty years, database systems have become the main infrastructure for the  convenient and effective development and execution of data-intensive applications. However, in many of today's Internet-based, multi-layered, heterogeneous information systems, database systems have degenerated to storage managers that are far away from the applications. The result is a huge, globally uncoordinated, partially replicated multimedia information space that often can hardly meet the information needs of today's users. We envision the concept of a hyperdatabase, which provides database functionality at a higher level of abstraction and thus brings database principles and its advantages closer to the applications. In analogy to traditional database systems that manage shared data and transactions, a hyperdatabase manages shared application components and services. A hyperdatabase system can be seen as a coordinator of distributed, heterogeneous data management components. It provides higher-order data independence by guaranteeing the immunity of applications not only against changes in the data storage and access structures but also against changes in the application components and services, e.g., with respect to the location, implementation, workload, number of replica of components and services. In our vision, a hyperdatabase will be the key infrastructure for developing and managing future information systems. At the interface, it will support component and service definition and deployment, specification of transactional processes encompassing multiple service invocations, service publication and subscription. Under the cover, it will perform metadata management, component and service discovery and tracking, scheduling, routing, and optimization of service requests, monitoring, flexible failure treatment, availability and scalability. Our overall goal is to investigate and identify the key database principles contributing to the vision of hyperdatabases. We have established a number of broad research directions tackling various problems of hyperdatabases: Database Cluster Computing, Advanced Transactional Coordination, Multimedia Information Management, and Information Dynamic & Mobility. These research efforts complement each other and result in prototype systems that demonstrate the applicability and practical usefulness of our research results.