  Simulation of Bose-Einstein condensates  
Using quantum Monte Carlo simulations we investigate ultra-cold atoms both in continuous space and in the presence of an optical lattice. The focus is on properties of the phases, such as Bose Einstein condensates, and the influence of magneto-optical traps on the behavior of these systems.
In order to study the Mott-transition observed in trapped atomic gases within an optical lattice we perform Monte Carlo simulations of the bosonic Hubbard model, which is an appropriate lattice model in the strongly interacting regime. The numerical technique which we are using, the stochastic series expansion quantum Monte Carlo, allows us to study local properties of the system and to measure quantities of direct relevance for the experimental situation, such as the momentum distribution function. We have improved the efficiency of the underlying algorithm, by using a directed loop scheme, which is has bounce-free regions also for the soft-core bosonic case. In addition to studying trapping geometries in various dimensions (1, 2, and 3), we are also investigating the dimensional crossover observed within optical lattices with anisotropic hopping matrix elements. Dynamical aspects of Bose-Einstein condensates can be studied using the time-dependent GrossPitaevski equations, which we solve using a combination of selfconsistent exact diagonalization and split-operator methods for the time-integration. We have extended this scheme to include the presence of a lattice potential. Using this approach, we study the temporal evolution of a BoseEinstein condensate in an optical lattice, which is kicked e.g. by tilting the magnetic trap out of the equilibrium orientation. We are particulary interested in potential transitions of the superfluid to a chaotic regime, along with the breakdown of quantum coherence. To study the equilibrium properties of Interacting Bose gases in continuous space we use Path Integral Monte Carlo techniques based on the Worm Algorithm. We employ this exact method to test an analytical theory for the weakly interacting Bose gas, namely the Beliaev's diagrammatic technique, which provides accurate results also in the fluctuation region. Again, using PIMC, we study the properties of ultracold Bose gases in the presence of correlated disorder created by optical speckles. We also plan to use this continuous-space technique to address problems, such as Bose gases in optical lattices, conventionally studied using discrete models like the Hubbard Hamiltonian. This c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> approach allows to treat systems at arbitrary temperature, filling factor and strength of the lattice and of the inter-atomic interaction. Our calculations are performed on the Asgard Beowulf cluster at ETH, and employes the ALPS library code for such simulations, which was developed in our group in collaboration with other international institutions.