  Molecular characterization, production and effects of new bifidobacterial bacteriocins on the human gut microbiota  
The biochemical, biological and molecular characteristics of bacteriocins produced by new bifidobacterial strains isolated from baby feces are studied. In a second stage, effects of these strains and their purified bacteriocins on the gut microbiota composition and activity will be researched.
In the human intestinal microbiota, Bifidobacterium is one of the most common genus. Bifidobacteria play a major role in promoting health and preventing disease, and affect human physiology in a multiplicity of ways. The mechanisms by which bifidobacteria prevent diarrhoea and gastrointestinal infections remain to be elucidated. One important mechanism that may explain the beneficial effects of bifidobacteria on gut health is the production of broad-spectrum antimicrobial inhibitors other than organic acids, such as bacteriocins. But until now, no convincing data support this hypothesis and the activities of bifidobacteria in the intestinal ecosystem have not been explored to a significant extent. Bacteriocins are a subgroup of the antimicrobial peptides that were originally defined as proteinaceous compounds that kill other Gram-positive bacteria that are closely related species and and from other genera for broad spectrum bacteriocins. The general objective of the project is to study the biochemical, biological and molecular characteristics of bacteriocins produced by new bifidobacterial isolates that were isolated from baby feces in a previous research, and to elucidate the effects and roles of bacteriocinogenic bifidobacteria and their bacteriocins on the gut microbiota composition and activity. To complete this research, different specific objectives are addressed: 1.To type bifidobacteria isolates at the species level, using advanced molecular methods; 2.To determine important biochemical and biological properties of bifidobacteria bacteriocin; 3.To determine the amino acid sequence of the peptide(s) and the genetic determinants for bacteriocin production; 4.To develop efficient and controlled fermentation strategies for high production of viable bifidobacteria and active bacteriocins; 5.To study the action of bacteriocinogenic bifidobacteria and their bacteriocins on the colonic microbiota composition and activity, using a new in vitro continuous colonic fermentation system with immobilized cells; 6.To screen for bacteriocin-producing bifidobacteria from different origins. Our typing data indicate that the isolates belong to a new species of bifidobacteria, Bifidobacterium thermoacidophilum, and exhibit intersting technological and probiotic characteristics for industrial development. Ultimately this research should contribute to demonstrating the effects c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> of bacteriocins and bacteriocinogenic bifidobacteria on composition and physiology of the complex intestinal microbiota, using advanced microbiological and molecular techniques and innovative models and technologies. This project should also demonstrate in vitro the capabilities of bacteriocin-producing bifidobacteria to prevent Listeria bacterial enteric infections. This research could result in developing new probiotic cultures in foods and nutraceutical products with enhanced effects on gut health.