  Molecular approaches to investigate and enhance drought tolerance in cassava  
The project aims at characterizing cassava response to drought and identify genes for increased tolerance. Transgenic approaches will also be tested as part of the strategies to generate cassava plants with increased performance under drought conditions. 
This project focuses on the molecular mechanisms underlying the drought response of cassava (Manihot esculenta). Genes differentially regulated during water stress will be identified by transcriptomics and proteomics studies in roots and leaves of drought tolerant cassava cultivars, under drought situations representative of field conditions. Expression patterns of candidate genes for an enhanced drought tolerant phenotype will be validated, and their function will be further studied employing transgenic cassava and virus induced gene silencing. This work will generate the first large-scale transcriptome and proteome map of cassava roots and leaves and its modulation upon drought, which will represent a valuable tool in basic physiological studies and will pave the way to the engineering of drought tolerant crop species of the Euphorbiaceae family. Cassava germplasm selection will be based on results from field experiments ongoing in Africa. We intend to use susceptible and tolerant genotypes to identify key genes involved in drought tolerance, which will be grown in a unique system developed within our group: the rootbox system. Transcriptional profiling and label-free proteomics data will be integrated employing bioinformatics protocols already optimized at ETH. Expression of candidate genes identified in the first part of the project will be validated by quantitative RT-PCR in an extended selection of farmer-preferred drought tolerant and drought susceptible cassava cultivars from Africa and South America. Finally, gene function and its contribution to drought tolerance will be studied in transgenic cassava for those candidate genes with validated expression patterns. These transgenic lines, with overexpressed or silenced candidate genes, will be evaluated for their tolerance to water stress and compared with transgenic cassava overexpressing transgenes with recognized drought tolerance-conferring capacity: the Cold Shock Protein A gene from Escherichia coli (CspA), the vacuolar H+-pyrophosphatase gene from Arabidopsis thaliana (AVP1) and isopentenyl transferase gene (IPT) under the control of the senescence associated receptor protein kinase promoter (PSARK). In parallel, we will use virus induced gene silencing (VIGS) in cassava to investigate additive contribution of multiple candidate genes to drought tolerance. These studies will certainly contribute to the understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying drought tolerance in cassava and will lead to its genetic improvement, in order to cope with the more frequent drought episodes due to climatic change that affect crop yields worldwide.