  Kennwerte zur ökologischen Beurteilung von Gebäuden  
In Analogie zur Baukostenplanung werden in diesem Projekt Kennwerten für die ökologische Beurteilung von Gebäuden entwickelt, die auf Erfahrungswerten basieren,  und auf verschiedenen Ebenen der Elementkostengliederung bereitgestellt. Grundlage der Untersuchung sind Daten des Baukosteninformationszen
The inclusion of an ecological evaluation in the building process is permanently gaining importance as a consequence of the sustainability discussion. For a long time research has concentrated on energy consumption and pollutant emission during the building utilisation phase. As those problems have found various solutions in the past years the focus is today shifting to environmental impacts which occur when erecting the building i.e. the production and use of building materials or building components. The decisions relevant for the ecological impacts of a building are usually made in early decision phases. To influence the outcome of the building process in the early planning phase, ecological indicators are needed. Those indicators should allow statements on the expecting environmental impacts basing on simple parameters such as geometry and used materials. Methods which are used for the ecological assessment of buildings usually are resource oriented, i.e. they assess the consumption of non-renewable resources and energies. Common methods are cumulative energy demand (CED) according to the VDI-Richtlinie 4600 in Germany and the method of Graue Energie in Switzerland. For this project we have set up a database by analyzing buildings according to building cost analysis. Today 20 buildings, subdivided into building elements and materials, are included in our database. The data has been linked with the two ecological assessment methods mentioned above. The evaluated results will be published in book form for building and architectural experts. In a later stage of the project more buildings will be included into the database. The next step of the project is the expansion of the ecological assessment of buildings to impact or damage oriented assessment methods (e.g. Eco-indicator 99, Swiss Ecopoints). With those methods also the emissions related to the material production and building erection are assessed. For this purpose our database is linked to data on building material production from the database Ecoinvent 2000.