  Are exotic invasions and species loss related to N:P stoichiometry? A test for the Brazilian Cerrado vegetation  
We aim at improving understanding about the influence of both N and P enrichment as well as N:P stoichiometry on species loss and exotic invasions in the herbaceous  plant communities of the Brazilian Cerrado. This 2 millions km2 biome is the most diverse savanna in the Neotropics.
Nutrient enrichment is often mentioned as an important process for both species loss and exotic ´ invasions in natural plant communities, but in most cases SnutrientS is used as a synonym for nitrogen (N). Whether phosphorus (P) enrichment and/or N:P stoichiometry are also important is less clear. Loss of species and exotic invasions have been studied most intensively in temperate regions of the northern hemisphere, where N is commonly a growth-limiting resource, but many hotspots of biodiversity are located around or south of the equator where P-limitation seems to be more common. We aim at improving understanding about the influence of both N and P enrichment as well as N:P stoichiometry on species loss and exotic invasions in the herbaceous plant communities of the Brazilian Cerrado. This 2 millions km2 biome is the most diverse savanna in the Neotropics. It is positioned in the major agribusiness area of Brazil on highly weathered P-poor soils. Our objectives are (1) to evaluate whether the occurrence of endangered and exotic invasive species plants are related to the productivity of the vegetation or to the type of nutrient limitation, (2) to examine the effects of N and P fertilization on biomass production and species composition of the Cerrado vegetation at field conditions, and (3) to study about the effects of N and P stoichiometry on plant traits and competition between native and alien grasses at controlled conditions. Besides contributing to the knowledge about fundamental ecological processes, this research will provide valuable information for management and conservation of the Cerrado, an extremely species-rich but threatened biome.