  Climate and Stratospheric Ozone during the 20th century (CASTRO)  
The project aims at investigating interannual-to-decadal variability of stratospheric circulation and ozone during the 20th century in relation to climate variability. Transient simulations will be performed with a state-of-the-art chemical climate model and compared with observations. 
The stratosphere plays an important role in the climate system both through dynamical and radiative mechanisms. Understanding these mechanisms is highly relevant for predicting the development of stratospheric ozone as well as for assessing future climate change. Our current understanding of stratospheric variability is largely based on observations and model simulations spanning the past 25 years, which is hardly enough to address, let alone quantify and attribute, decadal variability. For instance, the effects of large anomalies in sea surface temperatures such as El Niño on the stratosphere are not well known. This project aims at investigating interannual-to-decadal variability of stratospheric circulation and ozone during the entire 20th century in relation to climate variability. This goal will be achieved by a set of model experiments using a state-of-the-art chemical climate model as well as comparison with observations. An ensemble of 5 to 7 transient simulations of the entire 20th century will be performed, prescribing sea surface temperatures, land surface characteristics, volcanic aerosols, solar variability, and emissions. These simulations allow to estimate the contributions of internal variability and external forcing (as represented by the boundary conditions) to the total variability. Special emphasis will be devoted to the statistical analysis on low-frequency time scales as well as to individual, strong El Niño events such as 1925/36, 1930/1, 1940-1942, 1957/58, 1969/70, 1986/7, and 1997/8. For the 1940-1942 case, additional model simulations will be performed and compared to simulations performed with other models by other groups.