  Preshistoric landslides at Rossberg as recorded in the sediments of Lake Lauerz  
Goal of this project is to fingerprint the 1806-landslide and to find and date prehistoric landslide events and to get an idea of the origin and infilling history of Lake Lauerz. The key to reach these goals will be the sediment archive lying at the bottom of Lake Lauerz. 
Landslides from Rossberg It was on the 2nd of September 1806 when a large landslide was running down the slopes of Rossberg-Mountain, bringing destruction and death to the small village of Goldau. Today, this event, which caused the death of more than 450 people, is known as the largest historic landslide in Switzerland. Numerous historic sources of that time record that parts of the landslide mass had reached the shores of Lake Lauerz triggering enormous waves on this small lake. Even Seewen, a small village lying on the opposite end of the lake about 3 km away was hit strongly by the waves. But this 1806 event was not the only landslide, which was released on the slopes of Rossberg. Field observations done by various geologists reveal that there must have been numerous landslide events. Most of them are of prehistoric age since there are no written reports, unless for one smaller event taking place in the 13th century. Goal of this project is to date these prehistoric landslide events and to get an idea of the origin and infilling history of Lake Lauerz. The key to reach these goals will be the sediment archive lying at the bottom of Lake Lauerz. Study area ~ Lake Lauerz is a small lake with a surface area of 3km2. It is situated on the northern slopes of ~ m, which famous Rigi-Mountain in the heart of Switzerland. The maximum water-depth is only 13 is very untypical for a postglacial lake like in that region. Different theories on the formation of Lake Lauerz have thus been proposed, but up to now, none of them have been proven Methodology In a first stage, a high-resolution seismic survey with a pinger 3.5 kHz acoustic source will be performed. Additionally, a series of short sediment cores will be recovered from the bottom of the lake. According to this data, appropriate sites for long cores (subsurface depth up to 20 m) will be determined. These cores will be recovered in a second stage using an UWITEC Niederreiter coring system mounted on a transportable coring platform. Once this data is collected, we should be able to detect the 1806 event. Older events, which should have created similar sedimentary fingerprint (visible in the recovered cores) can then be recognized and dated.