  Ultra-low-power CMOS integrated readout circuits for carbon nanotube sensors 
This project will develop ultra-low-power CMOS circuits to interface carbon nanotube gas sensors, and to be also integrated with a data wireless transmission system and  energy harvesters in order to show the first prototype of an autonomous sensor node.
Autonomous wireless sensors networks (AWSNs) hold the promise of improving virtually all areas of our lives from safety, security, and health to environment, energy, logistics, and manufacturing. AWSNs impose very challenging performance requirements on their components, particularly concerning size and power consumption. Sensors are the key components of AWSNs. Recently, thanks to the advances in micro and nanotechnology, novel sensors have been designed matching most of the requirements imposed by AWSNs. However, still not much work has been shown on highperformance ultra-low-power integrated circuits based on CMOS technology that could interface such sensors and that are required by AWSNs. This project will deal with high-performance low-power suspended carbon nanotubes for gas sensing. As such sensors show very high low-frequency noise, novel measurement techniques trying to compensate for such high noise will first be investigated. Successively, these techniques will be implemented in CMOS-based integrated circuits: (1) consuming ultra-low-power (< 1 ¸ tW); (2) being compact in size (< 2 x 2 mm2); (3) providing very low noise levels (e.g., few pARMS in a 100 kHz bandwidth); (4) having a wide input range (e.g., 1 nA up to few ¸ tA) to accommodate for variations between different sensors; (5) having high resolution (> 10 bits). In a second phase of the project, other circuits will also be developed in order to manage the power generated by energy harvesters and to wirelessly transmit the data in a low-power fashion. Finally, all the developed circuits will be integrated with the carbon nanotube sensors and with energy harvesters in order to demonstrate a first completely autonomous sensor node that could then be included in a sensor network for, e.g., environmental monitoring.