  Population genetic analysis of Mycosphaerella graminicola effectors on wheat and wild grasses and correlated changes in pathogenicity 
This study will analyze and compare several M. graminicola cell wall-  degrading enzymes. Wheat- and wild grasses derived populations will be examined to study the variation and the putative relationship between sequence haplotypes and enzyme activity that might alter the fungal pathogenicity.
Until now the molecular and biochemical components altering the pathogenicity of fungi are far from being understood. Plant pathogenic fungi carry a wide range of cell wall-degrading enzymes (CWDEs) that are predicted to degrade plant cell walls to favor the entry to plant tissues (Kang and Bauchenauer, 2000; Wanyoike et al., 2002). Plant cell walls provide rigidity and permeability and also play an important role as physical barriers to pathogens. Recently, plant cell walls were found to play an active role in defense as a source of peptide signals (Esquerre-Tugaye et al., 2000). CWDEs released by plant pathogenic fungi could be important not only for penetration and subsequent hyphal branching inside the plant tissue, but also for the release of nutrients from the cell wall polysaccharides (De Lorenzo et al., 1997; Palmer and Skinner, 2002). The release of nutrients is crucial for a proper colonization of host tissues. CWDESs or some of their degradation products are supposed to elicit a defense response in the host and could therefore act as potential avirulence genes. Gene for gene (GFG) interactions characterize a pathogen strain-specific resistance reaction. In GFG systems, host proteins encoded by resistance (R) genes recognize strain-specific effector proteins encoded by the pathogen avirulence (Avr) genes. The pathogen detection induces a plant response that confers local or systemic resistance. To avoid recognition pathogens need to accumulate non-synonymous mutations leading to codon substitutions, nonsense mutations and partial or complete deletion of the Avr gene (Schürch et al., 2004; Stukenbrock and McDonald, 2007). Positive diversifying selection is an evolutionary force that favors new mutations that confer a fitness advantage and thus leads to an increase in gene diversity. Positive diversifying selection has been detected in effector genes of pathogens and in R-genes of hosts. Mycosphaerella graminicola (anamorph Septoria tritici) is the causal agent of Septoria tritici blotch of wheat and other poaceous hosts, and occurs worldwide across a wide range of climates (Eyal, 1999). The life cycle of M. graminicola includes both sexual and asexual stages. The sexual stage permits genetic recombination and produces airborne ascospores with the potential to be dispersed over several kilometers (Sanderson, 1972), whereas the asexual phase (S. tritici) produces pycnidiospores disseminated over limited distances from plant to plant via rain splash (Bannon and Cooke, 1998). M. graminicola is characterized by high nuclear (Zhan et al. 2003) and low mitochondrial diversity (Zhan et al. 2003 and 2004; Torriani et al. 2008). M. graminicola emerged as a new pathogen from ancestral populations of Mycosphaerella spp (S1 and S2) infecting wild grasses in the Middle East during the process of wheat domestication around 10,500 years ago (Stukenbrock et al., 2007). M. graminicola was further distributed throughout Europe during the spread of wheat cultivation approximately 5000-8000 years ago (Banke et al., 2004; McDonald et al., 1999) and more recently (500 and 150 years ago, respectively), by European colonists together with wheat into the Americas and Australia (Banke and McDonald, 2005). In M. graminicola a number of genes coding for CWDEs including proteases, xylanases, glucanases and cutinases have been isolated from expressed sequence tags (ESTs) (Palmer and Skin- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> ner, 2002). Correlation tests and principal component analysis revealed a significant correlation between the in vitro production of xylanase and pectinase and pathogenicity components. For example, necrosis frequency correlates to xylanase and mean of the lesion length was correlated to B-xylosidase. These results indicate that CWDEs are likely to be key determinants of pathogenicity in M. graminicola (Douaiher et al. 2007). In this project we will characterize the genetic diversity and biochemical activities of specific CWDEs, including cellulases, hemicellulases, cutinases, pectinases and arabinofuranosidases. The genetic diversity of the CWDE regulator SNF1 (protein kinase activity) will also be investigated. The tested isolates will represent distinct populations arising from different regions of four continents. Mycosphaerella spp. collected from uncultivated grasses of three different genera (Agropyron repens, Dactylis glomerata and Lolium multiflorum) were also included in the analysis. Specific alleles and activities of a series of CWDEs will be determined in a set of M. graminicola isolates. These strains might be used subsequently in greenhouse and field experiments to examine costs associated with high and/or low activities of these CWDEs.