  Design of a High Frequency Indoor Stochastic Radio Channel Model  

The increasing interest in WLANs operating in the GHz frequency range (5 - 60 GHz) requires  more precise knowledge about channel characterization and prediction. In this frequency range, wave propagation can be well described by the uniform geometrical theory of diffraction (UTD), which allows to separate a complicated field problem into a number of localized effects such as reflection and scattering. Away from interfering objects, plane waves travel in free space. In the stochastic radio channel, no particular information about the environment in which the waves propagate is available. Moreover, stochastic radio channel models reflect to some degree the environment in which they were designed: Models which are valid in a great variety of environments will exhibit properties different from models which are set up for a very particular scenario only. Since at high frequencies wave propagation is confined to rather small areas, the high frequency indoor radio channel strongly reflects the properties of the surrounding environment. For the design of stochastic channel models, the impact of side information about the properties of the environment on the statistics of channel parameters must be studied. This is performed by a combination of measurement results, of deterministic wave propagation tools, and of stochastic methods. From the evaluation of measurements at 5 and 24 GHz, relevant propagation mechanisms in the indoor channel are extracted and implemented in simple ray tracing tools. Applying a random description of the environment, a large set of realizations of different environments are drawn, and highly dimensional probability densities for random propagation scenarios are calculated. These densities reflect the properties of chosen side information about the environment. They can be used to simulate spatial channel impulse responses. Moreover, important integral quantities of the channel, such as spatial correlations and power delay profiles can be derived.