  Tunnel face stability and tunnelling induced settlements under transient conditions 
Understanding the behavior of medium permeability soils under the transient conditions prevailing around the advancing face is essential for construction safety and economy. We investigate the effect of advance rate on settlement and stability, as well as the standup  time of the tunnel face.
The most serious hazards in soft ground tunnelling are associated with a collapse of the tunnel face. In shallow tunnels the instability may propagate towards the surface, thereby creating a crater on the ground surface. Inadmissible surface settlements may occur even without a face failure, as a consequence of excavation-induced stress redistribution or soil consolidation caused by the drainage action of the tunnel. The response of high-permeability soils is practi-cally instantaneous, while low-permeability soils exhibit a pronounced time-dependency due to a transient seepage flow process that is triggered by the tunnel excavation and develops slowly over the course of time. In of these soils is more favourable than general, the short-term behaviour (Sundrained ¸ conditionsT) the deformations in-crease with time; the tunnel face the long-term one (Sdrained ¸ conditionsT): may be stable initially and fail only after some time. The behaviour of high- or low-permeability soils around the advancing tunnel face is well understood and can be analysed by considering the borderline cases of drained or undrained condi-tions, respectively. For medium permeability soils, however, very little research work has been done and there are hardly any systematic investigations available. The simplifying assumptions involving drained or undrained conditions may be uneconomical or unsafe, respectively, for such soils. Understanding and quantifying the behaviour of medium permeability soils under the transient conditions prevailing in the critical region around the advancing tunnel face is therefore essential for construction safety and economy. The research project aims to close the knowledge gaps existing in this respect. Typical questions to be answered concern the effect of the advance rate on surface settlement, the critical advance rate with respect to face stability, the time-development of surface settlement, the loss of stability during a standstill and the standup time of the tunnel face. The relevance of the project in terms of construction safety and cost is evident in view of the frequent occurrence of medium permeability soils (e.g. the many glacial tills in Switzerland or Germany) and the increasingly intensive use of urban underground space. The research project is also very interesting from a fundamental perspec-tive, as it deals with the demanding issue of two concurrent processes: the generation of excess pore pressures (due to tunnel advance) and the practically simultaneous dissipation of these pressures through consolidation. The main objectives of the project are: formulating and implementing efficient numerical simulation models that map the interaction between the advancing face, seepage flow and non-linear soil behaviour; understanding and quantifying the mechanisms underlying face failure and the development of surface settlement under transient conditions; working out recommendations and, if possible, simplified analysis procedures for practical tunnel design. One important methodological decision concerns the numerical simulation of the tunnel advance by the so-called steady-state method, which solves the advancing heading problem in a frame of reference which is fixed to the moving tunnel face. The project continues long-established research activities of our Institute into the problem of tunnel face stability, into numerical algorithms specifically for tunnel advance through satu-rated ground and into transient processes in tunnelling. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2>