  GNSS Monitoring of Alpine Mass Movements: X-Sense  
GNSS monitoring is our task within the X-Sense project where the anticipation of future environmental states and risk is improved by a systematic combination of environmental sensing at diverse temporal and spatial scales and process modeling is investigated.
This is a description of the whole x-Sense project which is a Nano-Tera (SNF program) cofinanced interdisciplinary project led by Prof. L. Thiele, Computer Engineering and Networks Laboratory, ETHZ, <thiele@tik.ee.ethz.ch> (see also corresponding RDB description) Within the x-Sense project our task is the mass movement monitoring by GNSS and the development of the therefore necessary software and algorithms. The X-Sense project is investigating whether the anticipation of future environmental states and risk is improved by a systematic combination of environmental sensing at diverse temporal and spatial scales and process modeling. To this extent it is our goal to apply Wireless Sensor Network technology to quantify mountain cryosphere phenomena and their transient responses to climate change. Furthermore WSN technology should enable safety critical applications in hostile environments. The goal of the project is twofold: On the one hand, the necessary models, methods and tools should be investigated that allow the design of a dependable, long-term sensing infrastructure in extreme environments. Secondly, a prototype system will be installed that enables quantitative studies of mountain cryosphere phenomena and that paves the way to early warning scenarios. The evaluation models and algorithms dealing with the data generated must be capable of processing multi-scale data. It is well known that the global climate change dramatically influences the visual appearance of mountain areas like the European Alps. Destructive geological processes can be triggered or intensified which influence the stability of slopes and may induce landslides. The interaction between these complex processes is poorly understood. The project XSense intends to perform research in this application context and has the following aims: TDevelop ¸ wireless sensing technology as a new scientific instrument for environmental sensing under extreme conditions. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> TIntegrate ¸ various sensing dimensions (such as pressure, humidity, crevice movements, high precision deformation and movements) in terms of sensing and processing hardware, software and sensor fusion algorithms. TExtend ¸ the spatial scope from local (microscopic) measurements to large scale information based on satellite radar remote sensing and fuse the resulting information. TUtilize ¸ this new measurement technology to advance applications in science and society: geophysical research and early warning against landslides and rockfall, thereby securing people in their homes, during recreational activities, in public transportation and cars. All these activities will be guided by thorough geophysical modeling and simulation as well as by demands from early warning scenarios. The project has the clear objective to develop a technology demonstrator during its runtime that integrates the new technologies into the application field and attracts high public visibility.