  Nationales Forschungsprogramm 65 - Neue urbane Qualität. URBAN POTENTIALS AND STRATEGIES IN METROPOLITAN TERRITORIES 
The project sets out to investigate and evaluate urban quality on the basis  of current urban developments in the metropolitan area of Zurich. For the purpose of constructing 'Urban Profiles', a set of instruments is to be developed that enable comparative studies of various urban constellations.
The project outline puts forth an interest in cities from the standpoint of methodology and content. It sets out to investigate, evaluate and represent urban quality on the basis of current urban developments and phenomena observed in the metropolitan area of Zurich. For the purpose of constructing 'Urban Profiles', a set of instruments is to be developed that will enable the comparative study of various urban constellations. Case studies are to be variously explored according to a range of thematic focuses and theoretical approaches in order to investigate and arrive at a set of criteria for identifying and evaluating urban quality in the context of contemporary urban regions. The projectSs three main goals are as follows: - First, a methodological framework is to be developed for exploring urban quality. 'Urban Profiles' are to be constructed from a catalogue of hard and soft urbanization parameters applying a set of instruments that will enable urban qualities and potentials to be represented in an interdisciplinary and comprehensible manner. - Second, within the framework of a series of 'Probes', three teams are to be assembled to simultaneously study current and compelling urban phenomena in the metropolitan area of Zurich from the various angles of URBAN SPACE, URBAN PROCESSES and URBAN SYNERGIES AND RESOURCES. This will enable the instruments employed in establishing 'Urban Profiles' to be both calibrated in practical case studies as well as tested at various scales in analysis and design. - Third, existing instruments are to be refined and news ones developed to arrive in conjunction with content-based findings at recommendations for practical application. As well, strategies are to be demonstrated and instruments proposed for detecting, actuating and transforming urban potentials into urban qualities.