  Experimental and Mathematical Framework to Control N-Linked Glycosylation  
Developing an experimental and mathematical framework to determine the impact of critical operating and feeding parameters to control N-linked glycosylation in mammalian fed-batch processes.
Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against cancer, autoimmune diseases and many others have become the most promising substances in the pipelines of biopharmaceutical companies. Mammalian cells represent the state-of-the-art expression system for monoclonal antibody manufacturing processes due to their ability of human-like posttranslational modifications. In particular, N-linked glycosylation has been shown to affect antibody stability (1), immunogenicity (2) as well as clearance rate (3) and is therefore considered as one of the major quality attribute. However, the complex and heterogeneous nature of glycosylation has caused problems to identify the most active form(s) and the development of cell culture processes which produce a desired pattern. It has been shown that cell culture conditions and media components such as pH, trace elements, C-sources and byproducts can have a significant impact on N-linked glycosylation. These parameters inevitably change in modern fed-batch processes with cell densities beyond 2e7 cells/ml. Ammonia accumulation (4), decreasing availability of intracellular nucleotide sugar donors (5) and changing expression of enzyme transferases (6) influence the glycosylation mechanism simultaneously and decrease the degree of glycosylation during a culture process. Therefore the main goal of this project is to develop an experimental and mathematical framework to obtain a desired and constant glycan pattern throughout a fed-batch process. A Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell fed-batch process will be used to investigate the individual as well as combinatory effects of critical process parameters such as pH, ammonia, galactose and trace elements, in an automated 24-micro bioreactor system (7). The automated bioreactor system allows not only experiments with defined culture conditions in small scale but also facilitates the implementation of various feeding profiles. Since the standard data set of cell density, basic metabolites and product concentration cannot explain all different glycosylation patterns, further measurements to quantify intracellular content of nucleotide sugars are carried out. In fact, with the help of modern highthroughput techniques the culture volumes of 10-15mL are sufficient to measure time dependent concentration profiles of all required species. Consequently, the experimental results will be used to tune a mathematical model. This model consist of a lumped metabolic model and a mechanistic model of N-linked glycosylation (8) which further incorporates external factors such as nucleotide sugar availability, pH, Ammonia and trace elements. After parameter estimation, the model will be applied to design cell culture processes with desired glycosylation pattern and the corresponding feeding profiles will be verified later in larger scales. Literature c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> 1. K. Zheng, C. Bantog, R. Bayer, The impact of glycosylation on monoclonal antibody confor mation and stability., MAbs 3, 568U576 (2011). 2. R. Jefferis, Glycosylation as a strategy to improve antibody-based therapeutics, Nat. Rev. 8, (2009). 226U34 3. N. Sethuraman, T. a Stadheim, Challenges in therapeutic glycoprotein production., Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 17, 341U346 (2006). 4. M. Gawlitzek, T. Ryll, J. Lofgren, M. B. Sliwkowski, Ammonium alters N-glycan structures of recombinant TNFR-IgG: degradative versus biosynthetic mechanisms., Biotechnol. Bioeng. 68, 637U646 (2000). 5. N. Kochanowski et al., Intracellular nucleotide and nucleotide sugar contents of cultured CHO cells determined by a fast, sensitive, and high-resolution ion-pair RP-HPLC., Anal. Biochem. 348, 243U251 (2006). 6. D. C. F. Wong, N. S. C. Wong, J. S. Y. Goh, L. M. May, M. G. S. Yap, Profiling of N glycosylation gene expression in CHO cell fed-batch cultures., Biotechnol. Bioeng. 107, 516U528 (2010). 7. S. Moses, Assessment of AMBR as a model for high-throughput cell culture process develop ment strategy, Adv. Biosci. Biotechnol. 03, 918U927 (2012). 8. I. Jimenez Del Val, J. M. Nagy, C. Kontoravdi, A dynamic mathematical model for monoclonal antibody N-linked glycosylation and nucleotide sugar donor transport within a maturing Golgi ap (2011). paratus., Biotechnol. Prog. 44, 1U44