  Short-lived events of extension and magmatism in the Permian of the South-Alpine domain  

 The Lower Permian in the Southern Alps is characterized by extensional sedimentary basins with volcanic inliers (Tregiovo, Collio, Orobic basins), as well as by large caldera-collapse structures in Bolzano and Lugano areas. The Collio basin between Val Trompia and Val Caffaro (Brescian Alps) is bounded by extensional faults and structural highs consisting of pre-Permian metamorphic basement. Alluvial fan to lacustrine sediments form the bulk of the basin fill, which reaches a thickness of up to 1000 meters. The biostratigraphy has been established by macroplants and palynomorphs, defining sediment deposition from the Upper Artinskian (Early Permian) onward and finishing in the Upper Ufimian (Late Permian). Rhyolitic lavas to ignimbrites occur at the bottom as well as on top of the sedimentary pile and may serve as lithological markers in order to date the duration of basin formation. U-Pb zircon dating of the lowermost and topmost rhyolite layers yielded preliminary results of 283 \pm 1 and 280.5 \pm 2 Ma, revealing an available time span of ca. 1-4 m.y. for sediment deposition. This age contrasts with the biostratigraphical age, which is suggested to cover a range from approximately 270 to 255 Ma according to timetables of Odin (1994). This short lifetime for an intramontane, continental basin is, however, in agreement with findings from Lower and Upper Carboniferous sedimentary basins of the Variscan Belt (Schaltegger, 1997). The Bolzano volcanics to the east of the Collio basin are known to be 276 \pm 3 Ma old (Barth et al., 1994), whereas neither the age of emplacement of the volcanic rocks of the Orobic basin nor of the Lugano area have been precisely known. A preliminary age of 281 Ma for the Lugano granophyre suugests that most of the Southalpine volcanics could be of similar age. By doing precise U-Pb dating on early versus late effusive lithologies in Bolzano and Lugano areas we hope to get information on whether these occurrences are diachronous with Val Caffaro or not. The Early Permian Southalpine basins and their volcanic rocks were formed during shortlived, regional extension events, accomodating large-scale strike slip along the southern limit of the Variscan chain. Extension caused reactivation of crustal and mantle sources leading to the generation of high-K calc-alkaline magmas.