  Droplet-based microfluidic synthesis of polymersomes and colloidosomes 

The encapsulation of drugs, flavors, colorings and other active agents is of increasing importance to the pharmaceutical, food and cosmetic industries. Polymersomes are vesicular self-assemblies of amphiphilic diblock copolymers, which consist of a spherical compartment enclosed by a macromolecular bilayer. Moreover, they are mechanically and thermodynamically more stable than vesicles whose membranes are composed of phospholipids (liposomes) and detergents. Accordingly, they have great potential as encapsulation and release systems. Conventional synthesis techniques, such as rehydration and electroformation, lead to polymersomes with wide size distributions and low encapsulation efficiencies. Recently, water-in-oil-in-water double-emulsion droplets generated in microreactors have been used as templates for the synthesis of polymersomes (PEG-b-PLA) to overcome such limitations. A crucial aspect of this technique is the dilution of the amphiphilic block copolymers with a mixture of organic solvents. Since organic solvents swell PDMS microfluidic devices, the mentioned synthesis methods are carried out in glass microcapillaries. However, the assembling of a glass capillary microfluidic platform is a time-consuming process and lacks reproducibility that soft lithography can provide. The goal of this project is to develop solvent-resistant microfluidic devices (PFPE-PDMS), for the synthesis of new types of monodisperse polymersomes with high encapsulation efficiencies. In addition, colloidal nanoparticles of different sizes, which will be synthesized on-chip, will be attached onto the surface of polymersomes resulting in an alternative type of vesicles known as colloidosomes. In this way, membrane permeabilities and rigidity can be easily manipulated to achieve different functionalities. resulting structures will be used for attaching biomolecules such as proteins, DNA and cells to the membranes of vesicles for a range of biomedical applications.