  Microsimulation and mathematical modeling of the natural history of colorectal cancer for optimal screening strategies (KLS) 
Microsimulation and mathematical modeling of the natural history of colorectal cancer for optimal screening strategies
Colorectal carcinoma (CRC) is a leading cause of cancer related mortality. CRC screening can prevent CRC mortality; however, the best application of CRC screening is unknown and insufficient clinical studies are available. Modeling experiments can provide important information for clinical guidelines and health economy. We want to model the natural history of CRC using two complementary strategies including a detailed microsimulation and a stochastic model. For the microsimulation model we will continue our preliminary work and develop a tool for usage under a public license. Thereby we aim to accurately reflect the natural history of CRC from the point of view of a practicing gastroenterologist. For the stochastic model we will start with existing models of CRC development and systematically extend the model to include more details of the clinical history of CRC. We will thereby address the true level of complexity such a model needs to have for making accurate predictions. Data from clinical studies will be used for calibration and validation of both models and direct access to epidemiological data bases is not needed. Sensitivity analyses and a systematic comparison of the assumptions of both models will help to develop robust predictions. Our carefully validated models might also set ramifications for assumptions of the pathogenesis of CRC. We will use both models to simulate CRC screening and calculate the cost-effectiveness of various screening interventions. The ETH linux cluster Brutus is available for high performance calculations. As a first application, we will simulate the Swiss CRC screening situation. In Switzerland, patient adherence to CRC screening might be lower than in the United States. Furthermore, CRC screening is currently not reimbursed by health insurances but efforts to introduce a publicly funded CRC screening program might soon succeed. We will use our simulation models to calculate benefits, costs, cost-effectiveness and required resources of such a screening program in Switzerland. Next, we want to use our validated models to answer various questions relevant to practicing gastroenterologists. First, we want to address the best timing of screening colonoscopies by directly testing all combinations of time points for one, two, three or four screening colonoscopies and determine the optimal cost- effectiveness. Second, we will address timing of follow-up colonoscopies after adenoma or cancer detection. Thereby, we will c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> compare different follow-up schedules including patient specific recommendations for an optimal outcome. A third application of our models will be quality assurance of colonoscopy. We will simulate different kinds of lowquality colonoscopy such as investigations not reaching the cecum,missing segments of the colon or failing in careful mucosa inspection. Resulting costs due to reduced cancer prevention would be an upper limit for measures to improve colonoscopy quality. In summary, we are planning to develop a microsimulation and a mathematically tractable tool for the simulation of CRC natural history and screening. We will apply our models to practical problems in clinical medicine including implications of the emerging Swiss colon cancer screening program and the best application of colonoscopy. Thereby, the combination of two models will provide robust predictions.