  Usage of Polyvinyl Alcohol (PVA) Fibre as Slurry Wall Reinforcement Material for the Two-Phase-Process  
Slurry walls are a relatively brittle material, which only small tensions with small deformations can take up. On basis of these realizations an armouring was made by means of PVA-fibres. Through this process an improvement of the mechanical characteristics of the material could have been achieved. 
Nowadays, slurry walls are used in many cases to ensure potential contaminant wells, such as landfills, refineries or other industrial facilities. In this way, it isaimed to prevent contaminated leach ate from broadening outside the encapsulation. As shown in various experiments, clay-cement bonded slurry wall materials are quite refractory. Furthermore, they are only able to absorb small amounts of tensile strengths. This material behaviour plays an important role at variations of stresses in soils. Installed in the ground, the functionality of slurry walls can be reduced significantly by fractures caused by additional tensile strengths. To address this problem, PVA fibre reinforcement was used to improve the functionality of the slurry wall. The purpose of PVA fibres is the improvement of mechanical properties, such as ductility and tensile strength of. The prevention of crack initiation and propagation was expected when PVA fibres were added. In case of a good bond between expandable PVA fibres and the cement matrix, fibres are able to absorb a significant amount of tractive forces when the cement is fractured. Since it is known that the fibre geometry influences the bond strength considerably, different fibre geometries were investigated. More over, the fibre content was varied to optimise its mechanical properties and process ability. This means that the process ability of the new fibre-slurry wall mixture compared to the process ability of the initial mixture must not be worse. Unconfined compression tests and bending traction tests were made on reinforced slurry wall material samples. Test results revealed the tendency to improved mechanical properties.