  Biophysical, institutional and economic drivers of sustainable soil use in yam systems for improved food security in West Africa (YAMSYS)  

Biophysical, institutional and economic drivers of sustainable soil use in yam systems for improved food security in West Africa (YAMSYS) Emmanuel Frossarda, B. Aighewib, S. Akéc, D. Barjolled, T. Bernetd, H. Bismarck Nacroe; D. Daof, L.N. Dibyg, V.K. Hgazaf, I.D. Kibaa,h, F. Lompoh, G. Nicolayd and J. Sixa a ETH Zurich, Switzerland b IITA, Ibadan,Nigeria c University Félix Houphouët-Boigny, Abidjan, Côte dSIvoire d FiBL, Frick, Switzerland, e Polytechnic University of Bobo Dioulasso, Burkina Faso; f CSRS, Abidjan, Côte dSIvoire g ICRAF, Abidjan, Côte dSIvoire h INERA, Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso emmanuel.frossard@usys.ethz.ch Yams (Dioscorea sp) are tuber crops essential for food security in West Africa. They are an important source of income for the actors involved in the yam value chain as well as an essential part of West African culture. Traditionally, yams are grown without external inputs as the first crop after a long-term fallow with very negative impacts on the environment. Moreover, traditional cropping systems have very low tuber productivity. Given the high prevalence of food insecurity, poverty and environmental degradation in West Africa, measures to improve the sustainability of yam cropping systems should be developed and implemented as soon as possible. YAMSYS aims at developing sustainable methods for soil management that will allow settling yams in long-term crop rotations, in order to increase tuber yields and to increase income of the actors working along the yam value chain. To reach these goals the YAMSYS research project team (6 research partners in West Africa and 2 in Switzerland) will study on one hand the effects of management options on soil fertility, yam yield and tuber quality, and on the other hand, the institutional and economic drivers of soil use and yam production. The project will be conducted in 4 sites located in Côte dSIvoire and Burkina Faso that are representative of the West African yam belt. Innovation platforms gathering the most important stakeholders of the project will be set-up at each of the 4 pilot sites. Based on continuous discussions of the project outputs, these platforms will elaborate and validate innovations that will increase the sustainability of yam farming systems in the region. Expected impacts of the research are: improved soil management practices, decreased need for new farmland, increased and stabilized yam production, improved food security and income at household level and improved income of actors involved in the yam value chain. YAMSYS will also have a strong capacity building component including the training of 5 PhD students and 20 MSc students from West Africa.