  Well-conditioned Boundary Integral Equations for Scattering  
We develop novel second-kind single-trace boundary integral equations for acoustic and electromagnetic scattering at composite objects. They are inherently well-conditioned  and allow discretization by means of discontinuous boundary elements.
Wave phenomena pervade the physical world in the form of electromagnetic radiation and sound. Thus, it goes without saying that predicting the propagation of waves is of tremendous importance in science and technology. On the one hand, simple models based on linear wave equations often offer sufficiently accurate descriptions. On the other hand, their actual numerical solution usually poses a challenge due to the oscillatory nature of waves and unbounded domains of propagation. This project targets the numerical simulation of wave propagation by means of so-called boundary element methods (BEM), which are very popular and competitive for that purpose, at least in the simple setting of wave diffraction by a single homogeneous object, the so-called scatterer. When this object is composed of several materials, efficiency of BEM suffers, because the solution of the linear system of equations created by BEM becomes very cumbersome. In this project, new kinds of BEM are to be developed and analyzed that facilitate the solution of the resulting linear systems of equations. One idea seeks formulations that give rise to inherently well-conditioned linear systems, for which a few steps of an iterative solver already give sufficiently accurate solutions. Another idea is to find BEM amenable to the policy of Calderon preconditioning. Here, we hope to arrive at linear systems that can rendered well-conditioned by a specific transformation. Well-conditioned BEM for the simulation of wave scattering at composite scatterers will close a gap the field of BEM. They will considerably enhance the scope of the method and may even enhance performance of industrial wave simulation codes, which often rely on BEM.