  High-Rate GNSS for Seismology  
It is the goal of this project to thoroughly study the applicability of highrate GNSS (up to 100 Hz) for seismology, and to assess its contribution to the characterization and quantification of earthquake parameters and, thus, its impact on earthquake monitoring and tsunami early warning systems
(Global Positioning System), an innovative observation The recent emergence of Shigh-rate ¸ GPST methodology, considerably improves the observation capabilities for dynamic surface movements during large earthquakes. In high-rate GPS, GPS receivers are used to measure ground motions (including static displacements) with a sampling interval below 1 sec. In this project we will use, in addition to the 1) standard US GPS, the 2) Russian GLONASS, and, via simulations, the 3) European GALILEO and 4) Chinese COMPASS systems. The term GNSS (Global Navigation Satellite Systems) comprises these and future global satellite positioning systems. It is the goal of this project to thoroughly study the applicability of high-rate GNSS (up to 100 Hz) for seismology, and to assess its contribution to the characterization and quantification of earthquake parameters and, therefore, its impact on earthquake monitoring and tsunami early warning systems. The expected benefits for the monitoring of earthquakes in Switzerland will be an additional focus of this project. To assess the impact of GNSS seismology on the fast and reliable characterization of earthquakes, a full end-to-end simulator (E2E) will be developed that starts with the generation of a consistent set of seismograms and ground motions for series of realistic earthquakes, increasing in complexity. These waveforms will be used to 1) simulate GNSS observations for each of the four satellite observational systems, 2) simulate earthquake motions with a 1D shake table and 3) steer a 3D robot arm. The shake table and arm will carry a GNSS antenna sampling at 100 Hz; the GNSS waveforms, recorded during these tests will be compared to the inertial sensor seismograms, and integrated with these seismograms in different inversion approaches to assess how well the (known) earthquake source can be reproduced by GNSS, seismology, or by a combination of both data sources. These studies will also be complemented by robot arm and shake table analysis of several existing, on-scale 1Hz GPS data sets, accompanied by high-frequency collocated seismic data recorded during real earthquakes.