  Antibiotic resistance genes in food: Molecular identifiation and transfer between microorganisms  
The antibiotic resistance (ABR) pattern of a representative bacterial group,  the enterococci, in ready-to-eat food is analyzed, a methodology for direct determination of ABR genes in food was established and the impact on ABR gene transfer in food and environment will be experimentally approached.
There are increasing concerns that food can contain bacteria carrying antibiotic (AB) resistance genes which represent a potential source of resistance transmission to humans. The main focus of our research project deals with the question to which extent AB resistant bacteria from raw and fermented ready-to-eat food products contribute to the development of resistance in the human intestinal microflora. In order to assess the significance and impact of such a transmission by food on the consumerSs health, the incidence of antibiotic resistant bacteria in food, the origin of their resistance genes and their transfer frequencies as well as acquiring mechanisms have to be elucidated. Particularly, antibiotic (AB) resistant Enterococcus strains are representative model organisms. Ready-to-eat raw and fermented meat produts will be analysed for their antibiotic resistance patterns and conjugative plasmid content. Typing and molecular analysis of tetracycline, erythromycin, gentamycin and vancomycin resistant enterococci reflects the situation resistance in animal food products. Direct identification of the tetracycline and erythromycin resistance gene pool in ready-to-eat cheeses and meat products are done by classical and real-time PCR approaches from which the later ones have to be developed. They will be evaluated for quantitative and qualitative assessments of the antibiotic resistance gene pool of such products. The molecular data will be used for comparative analysis with isolates from other sources in the food chain and clinical isolates to lighten up the origins of these isolates. Finally, the question of AB resistance gene transfer by bacterial conjugation will be elucidated under in vitro conditions between food relevant microorganisms under classical conditions, new encapsulation environments and in vitro gut conditions. Conclusions of resistance transfer mechanisms and intervention concepts for AB resistance elimination are expected from such experimental designs as well as safety considerations for starter cultures.