  Magnetohydrodynamics for Discharge Plasmas  
The flow of plasma in interaction with a magnetic field is described by the equations of magnetohydrodynamics (MHD). This project investigates the modeling and numerical simulation of industrial discharge plasmas, like in circuit breakers, based on variants of MHD. 
The flow of plasma in interaction with a magnetic field is described by the equations of magnetohydrodynamics (MHD). For a long time magnetohydrodynamics was the field of astrophysical research with only little industrial application. However, in recent technological applications extreme settings or sophisticated devices lead to the creation of plasmas which have to be modelled by magnetohydrodynamics. A major role is played by electric arcs and discharges. Examples are circuit breaker, micro-drilling devices and also nuclear fusion and advanced flow control. Only few papers consider scientific computing for industrial MHD like electric arcs. Furthermore, the analysis of the mathematical structure of the MHD system is still ongoing. In many cases electric arcs are a multi-physics field since not only gas dynamics and electrodynamics are combined but also other phenomena like turbulence, chemical reactions or radiation have to be taken into account. The correct combination of different phenomena has to be investigated and their interaction with numerical methods has to be clarified. In this project we investigate the evolution and extinction of generic electric arcs in high pressure environment. Extinction is linked to mathematical stability of solutions and can be studied in reduced models. Due to the interaction of the electric arc with an external network boundary conditions and driving forces need special dynamic real-time modeling. The results give physical understanding as well as influence the construction of suitable numerical methods. To incorporate special effects like Hall-currents and electron pressure in a mathematically transparent way we investigate plasma flow based on a two-fluid approximation where electrons and ions are considered separately. This extends the MHD equations to a multi-phase model with interesting hyperbolic properties. In particular, two different momentum equations change the type of the equations because one of Maxwell equations turns into a global constraint. This leads to a special numerical treatment and interesting deviations of the results from standard models.