  Internationalisation and Representative Democracy  
We aim to map and explain the existence of representative institutions in  IOs and the strength and types of their authority. In addition, we extend our previous analyses of national parliaments in the European Union, examining how and why parliaments use their formal powers.
Many believe that policy-making beyond the nation state undermines domestic representative democracy. Moreover, representative democracy beyond the state is considered improbable because for the foreseeable future there will be no world government that could be accountable to a global parliament and no global demos. Scholars have instead focused, first, on alternative forms of accountability based, for instance, on civil society or markets; and, second, on the virtues of international cooperation that may outweigh representative democratic deficits. While a global parliament is unlikely, representative democracy may nevertheless manifest itself in international politics in at least two ways: (1) the re-creation of more modest representative institutions at the global and regional international level; and (2) the adaptation of national parliaments to international policy-making. Both processes have received less scholarly attention than the dominant view that internationalisation and representative democracy are not easily compatible. Consequently, we know little about the extent and determinants of the national and international parliamentarisation of international policy-making. We pursue three goals in this project. First, we aim to map and explain the existence of representative institutions in IOs and the strength and types of their authority. Second, we extent our previous analyses of national parliaments in the European Union, examining how and why parliaments use their formal powers to become involved in EU decision-making. Third, we study the connection between the legitimacy and parliamentarisation of international organisations. Normatively, we develop standards to assess current patterns of parliamentarisation. In collaboration with other projects in the NCCR Democracy, we analyse whether parliamentarisation affects individual and media awareness and perceptions of IOs.