  Estimation of a linear demand system for Switzerland  
Econometric estimation of the linear demand system for use in computable general equilibrium models for Switzerland
In this project we estimate a consistent set of parameters of a linear demand system for the calibration of CGE models. Instead of using complete cases which would lead to a biased estimation we use a multiple imputation technique with chained equations to account for the many zero or missing values. We used data of the Swiss household survey for the years 2003 to 2005. CGE models use input-output-tables, which dier in their assumptions from the household survey data. This usually leads to inconsistencies between the estimated totals of the household survey data and the data from the national accounts data. Furthermore, the usual estimates from econometric studies can not be consistent with the model formulation because they are either based on complete cases estimates or do not take account of dierences between the survey data and the national accounts data. Discussion This paper shows that it is possible to estimate a consistent set of parameters of a linear demand system to be used in CGE modeling. The linear demand system allows a much more realistic formulation of the demand side of CGE models. In contrast to the often used constant elasticity functions, the linear demand system does not have unitary income elasticities. Estimates from econometric studies are usually based on complete cases because survey data contains many zeros and missings. We use imputation techniques and scaling to get a higher consistency between the uses survey and the national accounts data used in CGE models. Further research is necessary for testing the robustness of the estimates. As soon as the survey data for the years 2006-2008 are available, the model could be estimated a second time with more actual data. Another topic would be the estimation of other functional forms (for example the Indirect Addilog System as described and estimated in de Boer (2010)). Literatur de Boer, P. (2010). Modeling household behavior in a cge model: linear expenditure system or indirect addilog? submitted to Applied Economics. Stone, R. (1954). Linear expenditure systems and demand analysis: An application to the pat tern of british demand. The Economic Journal, 64(255):pp. 511U527. Geary, R. C. (1950). A note on "a constant-utility index of the cost of living". The Review of Economic Studies, 18(1):pp. 65U66.