  Towards kilometer-scale climate change scenarios  
This project develops a high-resolution cloud-resolving climate modeling capability and uses it for detailed studies of the hydrological cycle and its response to climate change in the greater Alpine region. 
In the current project we develop a high-resolution cloud-resolving climate modeling capability and use it to undertake a detailed study of the hydrological cycle and its response to climate change in the greater Alpine region. The specific aims are (1) to develop a cloud-resolving regional climate modeling capability and thereby to provide an attractive tool for the investigation of regional-scale climate processes and feedbacks, (2) to improve the understanding of the water cycle at regional scales and the associated feedback processes relating to the European summer climate and their representation in regional climate models, (3) to apply the cloud-resolving climate model to the production of first cloud-resolving climate change scenario runs for the greater Alpine region, (4) to evaluate the cloud-resolving climate model against high-resolution observational datasets and to compare it to lower-resolution climate simulations. Results from the study will be useful for an improved assessment of the hydrological cycle in the greater Alpine region and its response to climate change. The extended Alpine domain will cover an area of about 1100x1100 km with a horizontal resolution of 2.2 km. The scenario runs will constitute a unique contribution to the regional modeling efforts within and around international and national climate scenario activities. The simulations attempt to resolve small-scale phenomena, such as thunderstorms, fine-scale topography and landsurface forcing and their interactions with the large-scale atmospheric flow, which together form key ingredients of atmospheric and hydrologic processes in the greater Alpine region. In the medium term, this will allow a more reliable assessment of changes in extremes, including heavy precipitation, droughts, and summer heat waves. The recent emergence of a rapidly growing climate impact research community (e.g. NFP61) also demonstrates, that there is an urgent need for such high-resolution climate scenarios.