  Chromatin Genomics and Proteomics  
The basic mechanisms of epigenetic gene control are studied through genome-wide profiling of PcG/TrxG activities by high throughput sequencing methods, the role of non-coding RNAs in epigenetic gene control and proteomic analyses of PcG/TrxG complexes.
The Polycomb (PcG) and Trithorax (TrxG) group proteins form the basis of a cellular memory system maintaining heritable the transcriptional state of their target genes during development. Initially, identified in Drosophila as regulators of homeotic genes, PcG/TrxG proteins have been found to regulate a variety of target genes implicated in important biological processes like stem cell function, mammalian X chromosome inactivation and regeneration. Missregulation of PcG/TrxG proteins often leads to cancer development. PcG/TrxG proteins act as multisubunit complexes involved in the modulation of chromatin structure and covalent post-translational modifications of histones. In order to reveal the basic molecular mechanisms underlying PcG/TrxG gene regulation we follow three main research branches: 1) Genome-wide profiling of PcG/TrxG activities by high throughput sequencing methods We use chromatin immunoprecipitation in combination with high-throughput sequencing to identify genome-wide target genes controlled by the PcG/TrxG system (ChIP-Seq). Correlation with gene expression data and histone modification profiles allows uncovering regulatory hallmarks for different expression states. In combination with RNAi mediated knock down of specific PcG/TrxG components we molecularly dissect the regulatory pathways, which will ultimately lead to a systems understanding of the intricate interplay of these proteins at the level of chromatin 2) The role of non-coding RNAs in epigenetic gene control In Drosophila, the genes controlled by the PcG/TrxG system have PREs (PcG Response Elements) to which these proteins bind and either keep the gene repressed (PcG) or active (TrxG). In tissues where a PRE-controlled gene is active, transcription through the PRE sequences can be observed. In order to assess the regulatory capacity of non-coding RNA transcription in the maintenance of cellular memory we have identified and cloned several PRE derived transcripts and characterize their molecular function by means of genetics, biochemical and genomics approaches. 3) Proteomic analyses of PcG/TrxG complexes The possibility to tag proteins of interest with a biotin moiety allows the purification through the high affinity biotin: streptavidin interaction. We have engineered transgenic fly lines expressing the bacterial biotin ligase BirA and corresponding PcG proteins with a biotin-taggable fusion peptide. BirA is under GAL4 control enabling a tissue specific expression of biotin ligase activity. This permits the isolation of PcG protein complexes and their characterization by MassSpec as well as the identification of PcG target genes by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) in a tissue specific manner.