  Analyse und Bewertung der Entwicklung Regionaler Organisationen (RO) zur eigentumsübergreifenden Waldbewirtschaftung im Kanton Luzern sowie der Übertragbarkeit dieser Organisationsform auf andere Kantone  
Das Projekt untersucht den Erfolg existierender Regionaler Organisationen (RO) zur eigentumsübergreifenden Waldbewirtschaftung im Kanton wie Luzern sowie optimale Organisationsformen und die Übertragbarkeit des Konzepts der RO auf andere Kantone 
English project title: Analysis of the development and sustainability of the Regional Organizations (ROs) for joint Forest Management in Canton Lucerne In the Canton of Lucerne as well as in some other Cantons of Switzerland (e.g. Thurgau, Bern) major parts of the forested area are owned by a large number of persons, who only possess a small forest area each. This ownership structure with many smallholders poses difficulties for economically efficient forest management and can prevent technological and logistic innovation. Therefore, in 2006 the Canon of Luzern introduced the concept of Regional Organizations (RO) for propertytranscending forest management. ROs represent an innovative organization form for joint forest management, which leaves the basic ownership structure unchanged, while aiming at gains from economy of scale through integrated forest planning, management, harvesting and marketing of the wood. This research project study evaluates the impact and success of the ROs in the Canton of Lucerne, which have been formed since 2006 and their prospects for further development in the future. In addition the transferability of the concept of ROs to other cantons shall be analyzed in the study. It is also aims to identify which organizational forms and regulations of ROs are best suited and in which cantons the formation of ROs promises success. In addition to economic aspects, the attitudes and opinions of forest owners in and outside of ROs and of other actors in the woodchain towards ROs will be investigated. The investigation of perceived effects of the ROs from the perspective of these stakeholder groups, represent a crucial aspect of the evaluation of their transferability to other Cantons. Guiding Research Questions - How sustainable are the organizational structure and the concept of ROs in practice? - Are there differences with regard to economic and social sustainability, which can be explained by the various (partly) different forms of organization and (partly) different rules of the ROs? - Which change or improvement potential for ROs can be identified so far? - What potential have ROs in terms of better management of possible severe biotic or abiotic damage to forests (insect infestation, storm damage, etc.) in the future? - Is the concept of ROs (possibly in modified form) transferable to other cantons, and where and how could such a transfer be best accomplished? c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> Research Methods / Work Packages - Analysis of documents - Survey of forest owners by means of questionnaires - Interviews and discussions with experts (leaders of the ROs, actors of the wood-chain such as timber merchants, saw mills and large scale wood users, as well as representatives of the Canton Lucerne). Related Publications Hansmann, R., Kilchling, P., Simmler, M. Godat, J., & Seeland K. (2009). Intersektorale Innovationspolitik im Forstbereich als Beitrag zur Regionalentwicklung - dargestellt anhand zweier Projektbeispiele im Kanton Luzern. Zürich: ETH Zürich Institut für Umweltentscheidungen, Gruppe Gesellschaft, Umwelt und Kultur. Seeland, K., Godat, J., & Hansmann, R. (2011). Regional forest organizations and their innovation impact on forestry and regional development in central Switzerland. Forest Policy and Economics, 13(5), 353-360.