  PMSoil: Predictive mapping of soil properties for the evaluation of soil functions at regional scale  
PMSoil: Predictive mapping of soil properties for the Evaluation of soil functions at regional scale
Context: For a long time soil was mostly seen as resource for food production and as support for housing and infrastructure. Other soil functions were only recently recognized as equally important. Soil functions are not directly measureable, but are derived by pedotransfer functions from soil properties. To assess soil functions (digital soil assessment, DSA) in spatial planning and environmental management one needs therefore spatial soil information and a validated approach for DSA. Neither prerequisite is currently met in Switzerland: Spatial soil information is fragmentary and no validated system of pedotransfer functions for DSA exists. Methods of digital soil mapping (DSM) have the potential to create the required spatial soil information at affordable costs, but were hardly used in Switzerland so far. Hence, we propose here a research project to propel DSM in Switzerland and to establish a validated framework for soil function assessment. Objectives: Our objectives are to create large-scale soil property maps for three pilot study re gions (areas 10^2U10^3 km^2), to develop a validated system of pedotransfer functions for Swiss soils, and to apply them in the study regions to address stakeholdersS issues. This requires, that we also develop procedures and protocols for harmonizing legacy soil data. Approach: We shall utilize measurements of soil properties available for the study regions from legacy soil mapping projects and relate them by geostatistical and machine learning techniques to environmental covariates. Airborne data in the visible-to-infrared and gamma-ray range of the spectrum of electromagnetic waves will be collected in the project to supplement, along with available high-resolution (LiDAR) elevation data and derived terrain attributes, the set of environmental covariates. Legacy soil data will also be used to develop and validate pedotransfer functions for Switzerland. Relevant soil functions will be defined jointly with stakeholders, and soil function maps will be computed for the study regions. The precision of predictions of soil properties and functions will be validated with newly collected independent test data. Relevance of project: Our project will provide a scientific basis to generate quantitative, spatially highly resolved soil property and soil function maps from soil legacy data and environmental covariates by state-of-the-art DSM methods. We shall further establish a Swiss framework for soil c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> function assessment by providing a set of validated pedotransfer functions. This assessment system along with the developed roadmap how spatial soil information can be created is essential for the ´ Ssoil thematic strategyS of the federal administration, which has to work out how the increasing demand for accurate spatial soil information can be met in the future. Furthermore, we shall develop harmonization procedures that will be useful for any future application of legacy soil data. By addressing open research questions (e.g. extrapolating remote sensing information recorded on arable land to vegetation-covered parts of a landscape, comparison of geostatistical and machine learning methods for computing predictions of soil properties from environmental covariates), we shall moreover advance DSM technology independently of the Swiss context.