  Paraglacial Rock Slope Mechanics 
This project aims to clarify the role of rock and fracture mechanical attributes together with changes in effective stress in controlling the rock slope response (fracturing, damage, landsliding) to deglaciation in central Swiss alpine valleys.
Glacial erosion deepens valley floors and steepens adjacent rock slopes. With glacier retreat, val are ley walls are exposed in an over-steepened state and prone to collapse. SParaglacial ¸ processesT non-glacial processes (e.g. rockfall & rockslides) directly conditioned by cycles of glaciation and deglaciation. Such cycles act rapidly on the geological time scale to alter the slope boundary conditions, exposing bedrock to varying surface temperature and moisture conditions and changing the internal state of stress. The response of valley walls to these changing conditions is controlled by both the material properties and the rate and magnitude of local effective stress changes. Our project attempts to clarify the role of rock and fracture mechanical attributes on the paraglacial slope response in actively deglaciating landscapes between Grimsel Pass and the Aletsch glacier. Through the different tasks this project will contribute to advances in a number of fundamental themes. First, as an overall goal we will test models of paraglacial conditioning and associated e.g. when and where do slope failures or new fracture spatial / temporal rock slope response U systems develop? Next we analyze rock slope activity associated with a changing climate with outcomes for future assessment. Further, a series of fundamental scientific questions will be addressed, such as what are the detailed mechanisms driving formation of exfoliation fractures in granitic rocks, what is the temporal variability of landslide activity in the study area since the Last Glacial Maximum, and what are the dominant hydro-mechanical factors controlling the rock slope response to ongoing deglaciation? The broader impact of this project, however, reaches beyond the scientific community. Implications for natural hazard assessment are implicit in our research, and this project offers a broad framework for understanding processes associated with the development of alpine rock slope instabilities in response to changing climate and glacier retreat.