  Investigation of droplet dispersing processes in shear and elongational flow using rheo-opticmethods  

Multiphase emulsion and suspension systems are subject to process engineering treatment in mixing and dispersing processes in the chemical industry (e. g. polymer and copolymer melts, paints, vanishes) as well as in the food, pharmaceutical, and cosmetic sectors. The production of micro-homogeneous structures is the main objective during the dispersion process, since the many quality characteristics of such products are determined by their microstructure (mechanical or consistency behavior (rheology), separation stability, pumping, dosing, and subsequent treatment behavior). Emulsion droplets are deformed by shear and normal stresses acting in shear flows whereby high stresses lead to droplet break-up. The extent of droplet deformation in shear flow depends on the rheological behavior of the dispersed droplet and continuous phase fluids. Interfacial behavior also influences droplet deformation and break-up significantly. Many studies have been carried out on the droplet deformation and break-up behavior in fluid flow. In experimental studies the steady state deformation of the droplets, the time dependent deformation behavior of single droplets (100-500 10$^{-6}$m) under planar steady shear flow conditions, as well as the relaxation behavior, were determined. For the experiments, an optical flow device was constructed. The time dependent deformation behavior was studied theoretically as well as experimentally and the droplet (interface and disperse fluid) was modeled with a rheological model. The behavior of the model under shear flow conditions was compared with experimental results of the droplet deformation behavior. The knowledge of the time dependent droplet deformation behavior is useful for design and development of emulsification processes. Using the mechanism of droplet deformation in steady shear flow, a process to create multiphase systems with shapeadjusted particles was developed. The shaped particles are shear-induced structured emulsion droplets which are solidified when they reach a steady ellipsoidal deformation state. As a consequence of the ellipsoidal shape, the viscosity of these suspensions is reduced compared with spherical particle suspensions. These results provide new tools for multiphase product development, e. g. in the field of spreads (improvement of spreadability). Only exact knowledge of the interacting fundamental structuring mechanisms (drop deformation, break-up, and coalescence) creates the basis for an optimized tuning of technical, process engineering, and material parameters with regards to a functionally optimized structuring of emulsion systems. On the basis of the planned work, wider predictions are expected about the above mentioned structuring mechanisms of fluid emulsion drops and the mechanical stress and strain of the macromolecular constituents in the continuous emulsion phase as well as at the interface. Wider basic principals of this kind have a special significance for further applied research and development within the areas of chemistry, food technology, pharmaceutics, cosmetics as well as biotechnology. The flow in the dispersion apparatus is a matter of optimization to the effect that - regarding the functionality of many emulsion products (phase stability, rheology) - a desired fine dispersed emulsion structure (with a droplet size distribution as narrow as possible) is being produced without permanently changing other system constituents (e. g. macromolecular network architecture in the continuous fluid phase). The most interesting questions therefore are: How can the break-up / dispersion behavior of fluid deformable drops in uniaxial / biaxial shear, and in particular in elongational, c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> flow fields be described on the basis of experimental investigations, and how can optimization criteria for practice be developed? The rheology and rheo-optics of immiscible blends and multiphase systems are therefore studied in different flow fields. The objective of this research project is to investigate (1) the local behavior of the deformable interfaces between the dispersed and continuous phases of an immiscible multiphase fluid (e. g. droplet deformation, break-up, re-coalescence) under different flow conditions and (2) the resulting effect of this interfacial behavior on the global rheology and macro-structure of the multiphase system. In the context of this latter objective polymer blends will also be considered, where the non-Newtonian rheology of the dispersed and continuous phase of the emulsion is relevant. A four-roll mill device has been designed (in addition to the existing band shear apparatus) which produces an elongational flow field as well as mixed shear and elongation flow. This unique feature allows one to create flow fields similar to those in existing and planned rotor/stator dispersing apparatus. To monitor the size and shape of the droplets, along with dispersing and coalescence mechanisms, several rheo-optical techniques will be employed. This approach includes the measurement of optical parameters such as dichroism and birefringence that are directly correlated to the deformation and orientation of the droplets. In addition small angle light scattering (SALS) techniques will be carried out, allowing one to determine droplet deformation and break-up.