  EU-ENEXAL  
Project aimed at the solar-driven production of aluminum
Primary aluminum production industry is the world's larger industrial consumer of Background U energy and among the most CO2 intensive industries. It also discharges enormous quantities of wastes that further decrease the exergy efficiency of its production process. The conventional production of aluminum via the Hall-Héroult electrolytic process is characterized by its high energy approximately 11.9 GJ/ton Al U and its associated high specific greenhouse gas consumption U 0.7 ton CO2-equiv/ton Al. emissions U Thermochemical equilibrium calculations indicate the possibility of signiSolar-driven process U ficantly lowering the onset temperature of aluminum vapor formation via carbothermal reduction of Al2O3 by decreasing the total pressure, enabling its vacuum distillation. Further, the use of concentrated solar energy as the source of high-temperature process heat offers considerable energy savings and reduced concomitant CO2 emissions. When the reducing agent is derived from a biomass source, the solar-driven carbothermal reduction is CO2 neutral. Exploratory experimental runs using a solar reactor (see adjacent figure) were carried out at temperatures in the range 1300-2000 K (1027-1727 rC) and total pressures in the range 3.5-12 millibar, with reactants Al2O3 and bio-charcoal directly exposed to simulated high-flux solar irradiation. Aluminum was recovered by condensation of product gases, accompanied by the formation of Al4C3 and Al4O4C within the crucible. The main goal of this project is to provide primary aluminium industry with "green" Objectives U innovative technological and economical solutions, focusing on the: - significant improvement of energy and exergy efficiencies of the production process; - substantial reduction of GHG emissions; and - complete elimination of the solid wastes In order to achieve these goals, novel technologies for the reduction of alumina to aluminium and the complete utilization of the red mud will be demonstrated and validated in pilot-scale. These technologies promise to be energy-efficient and environmental-friendly, ensuring the competitiveness of the industry. The solar-driven process will be experimentally demonstrated using a prototype solar reactor capable of delivering 50 kW of concentrated solar radiation directly on the alumina and carbon mix under vacuum pressures. A reactor model will be developed based on heat and mass transfer analyses, and will serve as a tool for process optimization and scale-up to an industrial MW solar plant.