  Modeling and Control of a SCR System  
Model-based control strategies of a selective catalytic reduction system (SCR) are investigated. NOx conversion is to be maximized while preventing NH3 peaks at the outlet. 
INTRODUCTION Worldwide legislation demands lower and lower concentrations of toxic substances in the exhaust gas of combustion engines. TodaySs most stringent limits cannot be reached anymore by only tuning the engine. An exhaust gas aftertreatment system becomes mandatory. The focus on diesel engines lies mainly on the reduction of soot and nitrogen oxides (NOx). While the soot load is lowered by a particulate filter (DPF), the NOx concentration can be decreased by the selective catalytic reduction (SCR) of NOx with NH3. To ensure most efficient NOx conversion at a minimum NH3 slip, a SCR catalyst and a NH3 injection system are necessary. A sophisticated NH3 dosing control strategy becomes essential due to the ammonia storage capabilities of the catalyst and its function of temperature. PROJECT GOALS A NH3 dosing controller is developed on the basis of existing SCR models. The goal is to maximize NO conversion rates while keeping the NH3 slip below 10ppm for steady state but, more important, also under dynamic conditions. CURRENT RESULTS The controller developed contains three parts which are briefly described here. (Graphics 1) 1. The steady state feed forward controller determines the amount of NH3 needed for the given operating point. 2. The NH3 storage capability of the SCR catalyst is mostly a function of temperature which leads to unwanted NH3 peaks on temperature steps. The effects of changing operating conditions are compensated by the dynamic feedforward controller which includs a storage level observer. 3. An additional feedback controller is used to avoid the steady state error caused by ageing and system changes. Graphic 2 shows the improvement with active storage level compensation (red) to only steady state dosing (blue). The controller can lower the NH3 peaks from above 200ppm to below 50ppm. Since the feedback loop was not active in this measurement the steady state offset could not be compensated. OUTLOOK More effort needs to be put into modeling and simulation before better results can be achieved in the control part. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> The problem of measuring NH3 and NO concentration online in the vehicle is still one of the major problems in SCR aftertreatment since the available NOx sensors show a considerable cross sensitivity towards NH3. Only after this problem is solved the feedback loop will be applicable in the vehicle.