  Salt iodization and the 1st 1000 days  
The objective of this cross-sectional study is to test whether universal salt iodization (USI) can meet the dietary requirements of pregnant women, lactating women and  infants without causing excess iodine intake in school children and non-pregnant non-lactating women.
Background: Iodine deficiency can cause thyroid dysfunction and may impair health throughout the life cycle. The effects of iodine deficiency in pregnancy, infancy and early childhood are particularly critical since they may damage fetal and child development. Universal salt iodization (USI) is the most effective means to assure optimal population iodine status, and the key strategy to prevent and control iodine deficiency. But like other mass fortification strategies, it is uncertain whether USI can meet the increased dietary requirements of pregnant women, lactating women and infants. Aim: The objective of this study to test whether USI can meet the dietary requirements of pregnant women, lactating women and infants without causing excess iodine intake in school children and non-pregnant non-lactating women. Method: This cross-sectional study will be conducted in four local study sites with well-established USI programs in Croatia, China, the Philippines and Ghana. At each of the four sites, iodine status (UIC in spot samples) and thyroid function (thyroglobulin (Tg), TSH, total T4 on dried blood spots) will be assessed in women of reproductive age, pregnant women, lactating women, young infants (<6 months), toddlers (6-24 months) and school-aged children (n=400 for each of the six groups per study-site). A repeat urine sample will be collected in 30% of the participants and the prevalence of inadequate iodine intake will be estimated from adjusted UIC distributions. A breast milk sample will be collected in lactating women and the iodine concentration will be measured. A questionnaire for each of the six population groups will be used to assess the dietary intake of iodized salt and foods rich in native iodine. Salt, water and milk samples will be collected in the households and the iodine content will be measured. Sodium concentrations will be measured in the spot urine samples to estimate the total salt intake. Potential impact: The study outcomes will answer the key program question of whether an effective USI program can be truly universal for all population groups.