  GoEco! A community based eco-feedback approach to promote sustainable personal mobility styles  
GoEco! analyzes social processes and framework conditions that can lead to sustainable mobility behavior. In particular, a living lab experiment will (1) track people's activities and behavior and (2) use planning algorithms and (personalized) eco-feedback to foster behavior change.
Current mobility patterns are still dominated by car use, which accounts for high energy consumptions, local adverse impacts on health and contributes to global climate change. In the last years a number of alternative and energy-efficient mobility options emerged; yet, these still tend to be neglected due to a deep-rooted car dependency. How can we encourage going by bicycle or on foot, using the public transportation system, relying on emerging alternatives such as vehicle-sharing or car-pooling systems or even organising virtual meetings to avoid travelling? GoEco! seeks to overcome the traditional awareness-raising approach and, taking advantage of the wide acceptance of smartphones and tablets, proposes an innovative, community-based approach, directly addressing citizens and their everyday mobility choices. The main objective of GoEco! is to investigate if and how information feedback and social interactions (social comparison and peer pressure) can be effective in fostering changes in personal experiment, which is a field study mobility behaviour. To this purpose, we create a Sliving ¸ labT involving real-life users in real-world settings: eight hundred users, coming from Canton Ticino and the City of Zürich, will test a smartphone application developed on purpose, which will track elements to challenge them to modify their mobility behaviour. their trips and use Sgamification ¸ T To get a deeper insight on their perceptions and attitudes, they will be also involved in focus groups and interviews. Research in social and environmental psychology has shown that one of the most powerful triggers for sustainability transitions lays in providing personal feedback and comparison with the behaviour and performances of other members of oneSs community: they activate competition and a strive to stand out among peers. To test such hypotheses in the mobility sector, we develop a highly trans-disciplinary project, involving researchers from social sciences, geomatics, design, energy and computer science fields.