  Passive Load Alleviation Morphing Airfoils for Wind Turbine Blades 
The aim of this project is to develop morphing airfoils incorporating passive variable stiffness components to achieve alleviation of aerodynamic loads on wind turbine blades allowing for upscaling of current designs resulting in more efficient operation.
1. Project Title Passive Load Alleviation Morphing Airfoils for Wind Turbine Blades 2. State of the Art and Preliminary Work Conformal change of structural shape, or morphing, has been the subject of much research given the promise of contributing to aircraft with augmented capabilities in terms of manoeuvrability, fuel efficiency, and the ability to perform dissimilar tasks in an optimal manner. A further possible application where morphing can realise its full potential in terms of design improvements is on wind turbines. Loads caused by fluid structure interaction on wind turbine blades are highly variable and can fluctuate rapidly. This variability is caused by various factors including yawed operation, gusts, wind shear and turbulence. Loads can be significantly reduced by pitching the entire blade from the root, however due to their large inertia and size the speed at which such control can be realised is insufficient to effectively control rapidly varying aerodynamic loads on the blades. Presently, these aerodynamic loads restrict the upscaling of ratings and increase inspection costs posing major challenges for the effective implementation of wind turbine applications [8]. In view of this, morphing sections capable of rapidly changing shape to alleviate the effects of highly variable loads on wind turbine blades offer a very good alternative to better control these problems. Currently, several morphing airfoil designs for turbine blades have been developed with fitted actuators to actively change the section profile to alleviate critical aerodynamic loads [7]. Although the performance objective can be achieved by means of actively morphed airfoil sections, such designs may pose other challenges for effective implementation of this technology. Weight and added complexity are to be minimised to allow for a reliable operation and implementation of morphing wind blades. The use of the materials typically considered for actuation, shape memory alloy or piezoelectric materials on the scale required for wind turbine blades is expected to introduce considerable additional costs. In this respect, passive mechanisms for load alleviation are superior to active solutions in all aspects. First, the added weight on a morphing section design to alleviate loads on wind turbines is being reported to make out more than 60 % of the total weight of the morphing section [10]. Given that the change in shape on passively morphing airfoils would result from the energy imposed to the structure by the external load, such solutions would comparatively result in much less added mass. Secondly, moving parts, force transmitting mechanism and actuators required for actively morphed airfoils not only greatly increase the complexity of current designs, but also need constant inspection to maintain adequate operation. Finally, passive morphing solutions are the result of appropriate design without an implicit need for the use of specific materials, thus only moderately influencing the material costs, if at all. In view of the very hostile and remote locations at which large wind turbines are to be placed, inspection and maintenance of such structures becomes an overwhelming and operational design issue. Such deficiencies of active components are less likely to occur with passive solutions as these mostly rely on consistent physical properties of the used materials and mechanisms. This project intends to develop morphing airfoils for alleviation of aerodynamic loads on wind turbines by adding passive variable stiffness structural components. Multi-stable composites are structures capable of varying their stiffness as deflection is brought upon them. These structures exhibit multiple statically stable shapes, each of which can be designed to show different directional stiffness [2]. Changes between states occur due to externally forced deflections triggering a phenomenon known as snap-through which may involve large deflections of the laminate depen- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> ding on the designed shapes [3]. Once such a change of shape occurs, the structure remains in the newly attained state. Energy provided by external load acting upon the multi-stable airfoil, such as a gust, is effectively used to trigger a change to a different shape configuration which is designed to alleviate the loads on the structure. The directionality of the stiffness characteristics can thus be tailored such that as the sudden increase in load recedes, the structure snaps back as a result of the change in external forcing to a state having a more favourable shape for energy conversion. Tailoring multi-stability can be achieved by designing the residual stress field on selected components of the internal structure of the airfoil. These structural characteristics make such materials suitable components for stiffness variation resulting in shape morphing. In dynamic terms, multi-stable structures show desirable characteristics favourable for load alleviation. As a desired change of shape occurs, the newly attained state would exhibit a very different modal spectrum designed such that the frequencies associated to detrimental flap-wise vibration modes, related to high fatigue loads, lie separated from the natural frequencies of the alleviating configuration. Furthermore, the energy required to cause large deflections due to the change of stable configuration results in dissipation, analogous to what occurs in buckling, effectively adding damping to an inherently lightly damped structure. Exploiting the dynamic characteristics of multi-stable structures, including different vibration spectra for different configurations and high energy dissipation due to snap-through, are added benefits of including such components in the designed airfoils. Alleviation by passive morphing offers the possibility of achieving both reductions in peaks of static loads, by changing to a different shape reducing lift, as well as modal spectrum variation resulting in reduced dynamic response. In addition, added damping caused by energy dissipation due to triggered snap-through is achieved further reducing vibration levels. The end result of this project aims to produce a morphing airfoil capable of using the external load to induce configuration changes designed to reduce damaging effects caused by aerodynamic interactions in wind turbine blades. Such morphing turbine blades would allow for upscaling of the current designs to higher ratings as well as reduce inspection costs thanks to mitigation of induced vibrations leading to damaging fatigue loads. 3. Goals The general aim of this proposal is to offer a feasible option to enable upscaling and improved fatigue life of wind turbine blades by developing passive load alleviation morphing airfoils. The developed designs will focus on incorporating morphing components capable of varying their stiffness changing shape to effectively alleviate critical flap-wise vibrations and large increases in lift loads on the blades. These types of loads are responsible for fatigue loads and added material robustness in the wind turbine blades. 4. Methods and Experimental Tests The methodology of this proposal follows the design philosophy of smart structures, whereby several areas of engineering are integrated in order to deliver higher performance currently not achievable by established technologies. Therefore, a systems design approach will be followed in order to integrate from the earliest possible stage various aspects of the problem at hand, such as aerodynamics, aeroelasticity and structural dynamics. Particular attention to the tailoring of the dynamic response of the multiple states of the designed morphing airfoil will be placed in view of the potential gains in improving current fatigue life. In addition, nonlinear phenomena will be exploited to achieve the desired levels of performance, both in terms of stiffness variability and c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> desired dynamic behaviour. Simple analytical and semi-analytical models are derived in the initial stages of the project allowing to obtain a deep insight of the physical phenomena governing of the studied systems, as well as to produce optimised early stage designs. Complex simulations coupling high-fidelity finite element models with CFD software will be used in order to refine the design allowing to build suitable specimens for final experimental validation of the proposed solutions. Vibration and wind tunnel tests will be carried out as proof of concept validation. 5. Methods and Experimental Tests A.F. Arrieta, O. Bilgen, M.I Friswell, and P. Hagedorn. Passive load alleviation multi-stable morphing concept. Applied Physics Letters, Submitted for Publication, 2012 A.F. Arrieta, G. Spelsberg-Korspeter, P. Hagedorn, S. A. Neild, D. J. Wagg. Low order model for the dynamics of a bi-stable composite plate. Journal of Intelligent Material Systems and Structures, 2011, 22:2025U2043 A.F. Arrieta, D. J. Wagg, S. A. Neild. Dynamic snap-through for morphing of bi-stable composite plates. Journal of Intelligent Material Systems and Structures, 2011, 22, 103-112 G. Molinari, M. Quack, M., V. Dmitriev, M. Morari, P. Jenny, and P. Ermanni. Aero-Structural Optimization of Morphing Airfoils for Adaptive Wings. Journal of intelligent material systems and structures, Vol. 22, No. 10, 2011, pp. 1075 - 1089 W. Raither, A. Bergamini, P. and Ermanni. Adaptive Coupling in Composite Plates. 5th International Conference on Composites Testing and Model Identification, Lausanne, Switzerland, February 14-16, 2011, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, 2011 T.K. Barlas and G.A.M. van Kuik. Review of state of the art in smart rotor control research for wind turbines. Progress in Aerospace Sciences, 46:1U27, 2010 Nicolas Fichaux, Jos Beurskens, Peter Hjuler Jensen, and Justin Wilkes. Upwind: Design limits and solutions for very large wind turbines. Technical report, 2011 B. Lambie. Aeroelastic Investigation of a Wind Turbine Airfoil with Self-Adaptive Camber. PhD thesis, Technische Universität Darmstadt, 2011 S. Daynes and P. M. Weaver. Morphing Blade Fluid Structure Interaction. 50th AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, Structural Dynamics, and Materials Conference, 17th 23-26 April 2012, Honolulu, USA, 2012