  Highly reactive flows in LCM processes  
For LCM with thermosetting resins, the injection and curing are separated steps, but starting the curing reaction during impregnation could potentially reduce cycle time. The characterization and modeling of highly reactive injections is the main objective of this research project. 
General overview: In Liquid composite Molding processes, textiles are inserted into a mold, a reactive resin system is injected and cured afterwards. As the curing time can take a large amount of the production cycle, initiating the resin cure already during the injection is a promising method to shorten the cycle time. The optimum cure cycle can be usually found by using flow simulation. The input parameters are the permeability of the textile and the viscosity of the resin. The former is typically assumed to be unaffected by the latter, which is increasing with time due to the cure kinetics of the reaction. Research hypothesis: This research project departs from the hypothesis that in reactive flows, i.e. the thermoset is significantly curing during the injection, the material parameters cannot be separated: The permeability of the textile is changing, depending on the cure progression and the injection velocity. This is due to the laminar nature of the flow: Assuming the flow channels to be capillary tubes, the laminar streamlines at the wall are slower, with a velocity even close to zero, and therefore the fluid at the walls has a longer residence time inside the tube than the streamlines at the center. This leads to a build-up of gelled resin at the walls, decreasing the diameter of the tube and therefore the representative permeability. This behavior is modeled within capillary tubes and verified by experiments. The accuracy of the predictions can be further improved, but the effect is evident and should be addressed in the future for the simulations of highly reactive flows. The proposed approach at reactive LCM injection requires the integration of: -> Analysis and of the microscopic behavior of the reactive resin flow within the cavities of the porous medium during simultaneous injection and curing. -> Development of an experimental framework, both for material characterization and validation of the proposed models. -> Development of macroscopic permeability models for increased applicability of the microscopic predictions into industrial processes.