  OPERA (Oscillation Project with Emulsion-tRacking Apparatus)  
The OPERA project is a long-baseline neutrino oscillation experiment. The detector in the Gran Sasso underground laboratory near Rome is designed to detect the appearance of tau neutrinos in the beam of muon neutrinos from CERN, near Geneva.
The OPERA project is a long-baseline neutrino oscillation experiment searching for the appearance of tau-neutrinos in a muon-neutrino beam. The neutrinos are produced at CERN (CERN Neutrinos to Gran Sasso: CNGS) and directed towards the Gran Sasso underground laboratory (LNGS), near Rome, Italy, corresponding to a baseline of 730 km. Neutrino oscillations can occur when the three known neutrino flavor states, electron-, muon- and tau-neutrinos, which participate in weak interactions, are not identical to the mass eigenstates of the free neutrinos. If the three masses are not degenerate, especially if they are not all vanishing, the flavor states can be superpositions of the three mass eigenstates, described by the unitary MNSP neutrino mixing matrix. In this case the original flavor state produced at the neutrino source can oscillate into the other flavor states during the flight to the detector. Neutrino oscillations were first observed with the SuperKamiokande detector in Japan, measuring a deficit of atmospheric muonneutrinos produced by high-energetic cosmic rays interacting with nuclei in the atmosphere of the earth. Neutrino oscillations also offer an explanation for the long-standing solar neutrino puzzle, i.e., the fact that the flux of solar electron-neutrinos measured on earth was only about one halve of the flux predicted by solar model calculations. Recent measurements with the SNO detector, which is sensitive to all neutrino flavors, have yielded a total solar neutrino flux which agrees with the solar model prediction. In the mean time neutrino oscillations were confirmed by many experiments using different neutrino sources: natural neutrinos from the atmosphere and the sun, nuclear reactor neutrinos and neutrino beams from accelerators. All these experiments are so-called disappearance experiments, measuring a deficit of the neutrino flavor emitted from the source compared to the theoretical expectation without oscillation. The OPERA experiment is an appearance experiment designed to detect the appearance of tauneutrinos in an almost pure muon-neutrino beam. This will prove directly, for the first time, that the missing muon-neutrinos are oscillating into tau-neutrinos, which is the favored interpretation of the disappearance experiments. The signature for a tau-neutrino in the OPERA detector is the observation of the decay of a charged tau lepton produced in a charged current interaction of the tau-neutrino. The detector (see Fig. 1) consists of two identical super-modules; each super-module consists of a target section and a magnetic spectrometer to determine the momentum and the charge of muons escaping from the target. The targets contain a total of about 150'000 OPERA lead-emulsion bricks, allowing the reconstruction of charged particle tracks from a neutrino interaction in a brick with sub-micron precision. A brick is built from 57 nuclear emulsion films interleaved with 56 1 mm thick lead plates, and has a mass of 8.3 kg; the total mass of the two target sections is 1.25 ktons. In addition to the bricks there are electronic detectors to track secondary charged particles for a prediction of the brick in which a neutrino interaction occurred, and yielding exact timing information of the event. Since 2008 OPERA is collecting data. By the end of 2010 about 9600 beam correlated neutrino interactions in the bricks were recorded by the electronic detectors. In the scanned and analyzed c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> subsample a first tau decay candidate (see Fig. 2) was found and published in 2010. The experiment is planned to run 5 years. Assuming nominal beam intensity and the presently best values for the oscillation parameters, about 10 reconstructed tau decays are expected with a background of less than 1 event.