  Beyond Western Internationalism: Anti-Alcohol Activism and Gender Politics in India and Latin America (c. 1870-1940) 
The project analyses the link between anti-alcohol campaigns and gender politics in India and Latin America, in the context of the global temperance movement, first-wave feminism, and (post-)colonialism.
Public crusading against the evils of alcohol started as a moral reform issue in the context of the evangelical revival in the US and Britain. In the course of the nineteenth century, it became transformed into a global current which reached its first peak in the 1870s and 1880s. On the one hand, associations such as the International Order of the Good Templars expanded to continental Europe as well as to Asia and Africa, while the WomenSs Christian Temperance Organization (WCTU) U sent emissaries around the world. In which had its roots in the American missionary movement U Geneva, the Blue Cross was established after the model of the Red Cross. On the other hand, the causes of temperance, abstinence, and the promotion of alcohol-control policies were appropriated by groups as diverse as women anti-prostitution activists in Japan, Western Theosophists and Buddhist revivalists in Sri Lanka, and British and French colonial administrators in Western Africa, who tried counteract the influx of cheap potato gin from Hamburg into their respective territories. were to By the 1880s, civil society associations and initiatives committed to the Sbattle ¸ on alcoholT be found on all continents, and their membership widely transcended the boundaries of a Western intellectual internationalism. Anti-alcoholism can thus be understood as an early global movement, the analysis of which can shed new light on the emergence of a transnational civil society and elucidate its ambiguous tendencies of universalism, exclusiveness, and internal hierarchies. as well A variety of sometimes contradictory social, cultural, and political causes, Sprogressive ¸ T as conservative were connected to temperance campaigns. Anti-colonial activists sometimes gained their first experiences with public campaigning in the temperance work, while the suppression of alcohol sales indeed threatened an important financial source of colonial empires which heavily relied on taxes and customs on alcoholic beverages. At the same time, regulating alcohol sales could also be connected to imperial civilizing missions. In England, British settler colonies, Scandinavia, Germany and Switzerland, women were strongly involved in anti-alcohol campaigns. In the US, women even formed the majority of temperance workers. Alcohol appeared as a Sdevil ¸ of the domestic sphereT (Scott Martin) which led to male violence and the destruction of the familySs economic resources. Preventing (working-class) men from drinking was thus seen as a crucial element for universalizing the male breadwinner family model and the construction of a new masculinity. In the US and other (former) British settler colonies, temperance work enabled women to speak and act in the public sphere; toward the end of the nineteenth century, womenSs anti-alcohol associations increasingly participated in the struggle for (white/Anglo-Saxon) female suffrage. At the same time, crusading against alcohol became part of an international SwomenSs ¸ mission to womenT: the WCTU wanted to promote temperance Sfor ¸ God and Home and Every Land.T While this nexus of first wave feminism and temperance has been well studied for (Anglophone) Western contexts, the involvement of women in (post-)colonial contexts has so far received much less attention. In Chile, Argentina, and Uruguay, the united cause of Sla ¸ lucha contra el al coholism y el sufragio femeninoT (Paulina Luisi) had a strong potential for mobilization. In India, considerable numbers of women supported the independence movementSs demands for total prohibition and participated in the picketing of liquor stores and other measures of boycott. These women, however, were not (or only marginally) present in the US-based international networks; India and China were Srepresented by at the biannual conventions of the SWorldSs ¸ WCTUT, ¸ T Western missionaries from those countries. The project will therefore, on the one hand, explore the tensions inherent in international temperance work, i.e. the complex intersections of feminism, racism and imperialism. On the other hand, it will particularly focus on the agency and actions of women from Latin America and India. It seeks to trace the alternative networks and alliances they c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> formed and to study their gender politics in local constellations of power and political contestation.