  Electrochemical Restoration Techniques (ECR and ER)  

Conventional repair of chloride contaminated as well as carbonated reinforced structures  consists in removal of chloride contaminated / carbonated concrete and place new alkaline mortar of concrete (patchwork) . Very often sound concrete with high compressive strength has to be removed only due to excessive chloride contamination or carbonation. Rehabilitation in an early stage, when only slight corrosion of the rebars occured, can be performed by essentially non destructive electrochemical methods such as electrochemical chloride removal (ECR) and electrochemical realkalization (ER). Both techniques use electrical current flow from the rebars (cathode) to an external anode on the concrete surface. ECR and ER have been tested and evaluated as rehabilitation method on site . For ECR the results show that about 50% of the initial (total) chloride content is removed within eight weeks (ca. 5 Millions C/m2). In the treated zones of the structure the rebars repassivated due to the increase in alkalinity at the cathode, the half-cell potentials became more positive by about 100 mV. A comparison with the theoretical efficiency for chloride removal, calculated from the transference number of chloride ions, show that mainly the free chlorides in the pore solution of the concrete are removed. A second treatment after several month can remove orignially bound chlorides, too. After the treatment a cement based surface coating was applied to protect the concrete from further chloride ingress. Inspection of the treated surface by potential mapping after six year revealed a homogeneous completely passive state of the reinforcement. ECR can be considered an effective, nearly non-destructive and durable treatment. For ER repassivation of the rebars was found after the treatment duration of about one week, potential measurements being more difficult to interpret on carbonated and realkalized structures. The long term durability of the treated site is followed.