  Kinematic long-term monitoring of local glacier surface deformations using single frequency GNSS  
Surface changes of a glacier are characterized by long-term processes like flow and ablation and by sporadic events like glacial lake outburst floods. Low-cost singlefrequency GNSS measurements can be processed to yield both types of variations for studying enand subglacial processes.
Surface changes of a glacier are characterized by long-term processes like flow and ablation and by sporadic events like glacial lake outburst floods (GLOF). Measurements of surface dynamics and surface changes provide valuable boundary conditions for modelling en- and subglacial processes. Currently, it is difficult to obtain sufficiently dense surface information especially for glaciers in remote locations because coverage by remote sensing satellites is rather sparse in time, installation and operation of local measurement systems is very costly. We investigate the use of low-cost single-frequency GNSS equipment for this purpose because it is associated with low power consumption, low weight and low maintenance but still offers the potential to achieve relative positions with mm-level accuracies kinematically within a network of permanently tracking GNSS stations. At the same time, such a system also offers long-term stability. It thus allows detecting both long-term motions on the order of a few mm to cm per year and short term motion anomalies of the order of a few mm per day. Data processing is particularly challenging for such a situation because the low-cost receivers and antennas provide data with poor signal-to-noise ratios, and because the relative motion of the network points may be too fast for batch-wise static data processing but too low for standard kinematic processing. We use a Kalman Filter post-processing software with position and velocity constraints, signal-to-noise ratio based variance models of the observations, and various motion models to process such data. Current research focuses on the selection and adaptation of a suitable dynamic model and on detection of false ambiguity fixes which may lead to slow filter divergence. In a cooperation with the Austrian Central Institute for Meteorology and Geodynamics (ZAMG) a GNSS network consisting of 5 single-frequency ublox GPS receivers and two Trimble dual frequency GNSS receivers has been installed at the A.P. Olsen Ice Cap in Northeast Greenland. This location is particularly interesting because it is a cold glacier on which an enormous GLOF occurred once every summer during the last few years. Each of the network stations on the glacier is equipped with a solar panel, a wind turbine, a set of batteries, a power controller and a data logger in addition to the GNSS equipment and a seismic recorder. Data collected and processed so far have indicated that the low-cost GNSS-based monitoring is feasible and provides the temporal resolution and accuracy required for studying GLOF processes using short term motion anomalies. Joint processing of GNSS and seismic data along with data from sporadic radar measurements are planned for the nearest future. Currently we are preparing another field trip to upgrade the monitoring network and to improve the spatial distribution of the stations. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2>