  Computatonal methods for estimating patient-specific HIV fitness landscapes from next-generation sequencing data (ETH FEL) 
Computatonal methods for estimating patient-specific HIV fitness landscapes from next-generation sequencing data
Since the discovery of HIV and the development of the first anti-retroviral drug, treatment of HIV/AIDS has made great progress. With the arrival of new classes of drugs, even eradication of HIV has been postulated, but only to be disproven shortly afterwards. A major limitation of all available drugs and applied drug combinations is the ability of the virus population to generate drug resistant mutants. A different route to enhancing the effectiveness of therapy focuses on actively targeting the state of the underlying viral population. As a key factor for the success of antiretroviral treatment is the appearance of drug resistance mutations in a patientSs HIV population, optimising therapy through personalized drug regimens is currently the most viable option. Nextgeneration sequencing (NGS) platforms can generate data from intra-patient HIV populations in a cost-efficient manner with sequencing costs dropping exponentially. With such wealth of information, we aim at developing models to predict certain aspects of the evolutionary dynamics of HIV. A significant part of this effort focuses on inferring the fitness of individual HIV genotypes within a single infected patient. Only deep-coverage sequencing can allow for arriving at these underlying parameters, as traditional sequencing technology cannot reach such level of detail. This project develops a new computational approach to the study of HIV fitness landscapes. We will integrate statistical modelling that accounts for the specific data generation patterns of NGS technology with mathematical models of virus dynamics originating from theoretical biology. We develop parametric fitness landscape models that capture various types of epistatic interactions and provide optimal predictive power on two clinical HIV data sets. Specifically, we will analyse high-quality genetic time series data from untreated patients resembling a quasi-stationary regime, and pairs of matched transmitter and recipient virus obtained from a primary infection study to analyse differential evolution of the same initial viral population in different environments. Ultimately, we aim at completing a computational pipeline from viral NGS data to clinical treatment optimisation for each individual patient. Intra-patient viral fitness is a key quantity in this endeavour that is difficult to assess experimentally. The patient-specific, sequencing-based approach proposed here will thus be a further step towards genomics-driven, personalised treatment.