  Global population genetics and phylogeography of the rice sheath blight, maize banded leaf, and soybean aerial blight pathogen Rhizoctonia solani anastomosis group 1 IA  
Microsatellite markers will be used to quantify genetic diversity and estimate population genetic parameters for R. solani AGI-1A populations from rice, soybeans and maize. DNA sequence loci from the nuclear and mitochondrial genomes will be used to determine the center of origin of this pathogen.
Summary One of the most important groups within the Rhizoctonia solani species complex is AG-1, a major group of fungal pathogens infecting soybean, rice, maize and other important crops worldwide. The fungus causes leaf blight on soybean, sheath blight on rice and banded leaf and sheath blight on maize. These diseases are considered devastating in terms of yield loss where they occur. Control strategies available for these diseases are limited, relying mainly on fungicide applications, which have significant, deleterious environmental effects. Breeding resistance to leaf/sheath blight into these crops is difficult because resistance is expressed quantitatively. Increased knowledge of the population biology of the pathogen is needed to implement more effective control strategies, and this project is structured to provide significant new insights into the population biology of R. solani AG-1. R. solani AG-1 IA is still considered to be mainly asexual, especially the rice and maize-infecting populations, although we have presented evidence that recombination occurs (Rosewich et al. 1999; Linde et al. 2005) based on analysis of population structure in rice-infecting populations from Texas and India. Knowledge regarding the center of origin, migration patterns, and the possibilities of population subdivision is non-existent. Although is some evidence suggesting host specialization between the soybean-infecting and rice-infecting populations of R. solani AG-1 IA, this is a question that needs a rigorous examination. Knowledge of the population biology and phylogeography of pathogens is essential to implement sustainable management strategies and to identify sources of infection. Our key objectives for this project are: 1) To determine whether speciation driven by host-specialization is under way or has already occurred between Poaceae-infecting (rice/maize) and Fabaceae-infecting (soybean) populations of Rhizoctonia solani AG-1 IA. 2) To determine the intercontinental genetic structure of geographically distinct Poaceae-infecting (rice/maize) and Fabaceae-infecting (soybean) populations of R. solani AG-1 IA. As part of this goal, the first objective will be to determine the degree of similarity and genetic relatedness among geographically distinct field populations of the pathogen. A second objective will be to determine the importance of recombination in populations of R. solani AG-1 IA originating from different hosts. These populations will be analyzed using a set of microsatellite loci recently developed in our lab as novel molecular marker tools for Rhizoctonia. 3) To determine the phylogeography of Rhizoctonia solani AG-1 IA using DNA sequence loci from the nuclear and c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> mitochondrial genomes. This will provide us with information concerning the center of origin of the pathogen and the directionality of gene flow. We intend to test the hypothesis that these are native pathogens that were selected out of the local environment when the crops (maize, rice, or soybean) were introduced to new continents. Rationale for the proposed project and state of research Description of the organism and its importance as a pathogen SRhizoctonia ¸ solani thus emerges as a fungus of ancient lineage, great versatility, and enormous capacity for destruction of man`s crops. The relatively simple structure and life cycle of this fungus, evidence of continuously evolutionary plasticity, may well be basic to its marked success in Just how ancient, may eventually be determinedT (K. BAKER, 1970). both time and spaceE Rhizoctonia solani Kühn is a species complex composed of genetically distinct groups of fungi with very diverse life histories. Current classification within the R. solani complex is based largely on grouping of isolates into anastomosis groups (AGs) based on their hyphal interactions. At least 14 AGs have been described within the R. solani complex (CARLING, 1996). Many AGs have been further subdivided into subgroups that differ for one or more biochemical, genetic, phenotypic or pathogenic characteristics (OGOSHI, 1987; SNEH et al. 1996). Current knowledge suggests that AGs and their subgroups represent independent evolutionary units within R. solani (CUBETA & VILGALYS, 1997; GONZALES et. al. 2001). Although a clearer understanding of the biology and ecology of R. solani is emerging, basic questions about the nature of populations and individuals remain unrevealed for most of these R. solani anastomosis groups. One of the most important groups within the R. solani complex is AG-1 IA, a major pathogen infecting soybean, rice, maize and other important crops worldwide. The distinction among subgroups within the AG-1 (IA, IB, IC and ID), besides the anastomosis criterium, is based upon colony morphology, type of sclerotia produced, and mainly pathogenicity differences. Ribossomal DNA data support the phylogenetic distinction among these subgroups (CARLING, 1996; GONZALES et al. 2001). The AG-1 IA fungus causes leaf blight on soybean and sheath blight and sheath spot on rice (JONES & BELMAR, 1989). It is also an important maize pathogen causing outbreaks of banded leaf and sheath blight (BLSB), in parts of Asia and South America (PASCUAL & HYAKUMACHI, 2000; PASCUAL et al. 2000; SHARMA et al. 2002). R. solani AG-1 IA is also associated with hosts such as sorghum, mungbean and cowpea (BLACK et al. 1996, O'NEILL & RUSH, 1982). The symptoms of the disease on soybean (A), rice (B) and maize (C and D) are shown in Figure 1. Considering the global economic importance of soybean, rice and maize as commodities, R. solani AG-1-IA diseases on these crops have a worldwide significance. Soybean leaf blight is one of the most devastating Rhizoctonia diseases globally. In the USA, the yield losses caused by rhizoctonia foliar blight on soybean can range from 30-45% in Louisiana (YANG et al. 1990; MUYOLLO et al. 1993). In South America, particularly in the Brazilian States of Maranhão, Mato Grosso, Pará, Piauí, Roraima and Tocantins in the Amazon region where the environmental conditions are favorable for the pathogen, yield losses caused by rhizoctonia leaf blight can vary from 31-60% (YORINORI, 1998; MEYER & YORINORI, 1999). Rice sheath blight is one of the most devasta- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> ting Rhizoctonia diseases on rice around the world. Yield loss estimates in China, India, Japan and the USA range from 17-48%, depending on the disease severity (AHN & MEW, 1986; CHANG, 1986; RAJAN, 1987, OHTA & SHIMADA, 1990; MARCHETTI & BOLLICH, 1991). BLSB is an emerging disease problem in Asia that is prevalent in hot and humid conditions often associated with paddy rice cultivation. As the use of maize in rice cropping systems increases, BLSB may become a constraint to maize production (SHARMA et al. 2002). The disease is now appearing with increasing frequency in maize fields in Buthan, India, Indonesia, Nepal, Philippines, southern China, Vietnam and Africa as well. In collaboration with Venezuelan researchers, we recently detected and collected populations of R. solani AG-1 IA from maize in Venezuela. The maize disease results in direct grain yield loss due to premature plant death, stalk breakage and ear rot. Losses up to 11-40% have been reported (SAXENA, 2002). The control strategies available for these diseases are limited. Crop rotations have little effect and no resistant varieties are commercially available. Breeding rice or soybean with resistance to sheath/foliar blight is difficult, because the resistance is expressed quantitatively, and the relationship between symptom expression and disease-induced yield losses is not clear (MARCHETTI & BOLLICH, 1991; YORINORI, 1998; MEYER, 2001; SAXENA, 2002). Fungicide applications are the primary means for management of the disease, which has an enormous associated environmental impact (MEYER, 2001). Mode of reproduction of R. solani AG-1 IA Most of the AGs of R. solani are considered to be mainly asexual, with vegetative mycelium and sclerotia as the primary agents of dissemination and survival (ADAMS, 1996). The conjecture that the R. solani species complex is primarily asexual is associated with our lack of understanding of the importance of heterokaryotization in nature. Field isolates of R. solani are generally assumed to be heterokaryotic (FLENTJE et al.1970). Therefore, if recombination plays an important role in the population structure of this pathogen, heterokaryotization through fusion of somatic mycelium from two (monokaryotic) basidiospores ought to occur prior to infection. R. solani AG-1 IA on soybeans is an exception because it is thought to have a predominantly sexual reproductive system on this host. The perfect stage of the fungus (Thanathephorus cucumeris (Frank) Donk) is frequently associated with the soybean leaf blight disease (FENILLE et al. 2002, 2003). Though basidiospore-bearing hymenia of R. solani AG-1 IA have been observed in soybean fields, and are thought to have an important role in disease epidemiology, it is currently unknown whether recombination occurs in field isolates or whether AG-1 IA is homothallic or heterothallic. In contrast to the situation on soybeans, AG-1 IA on rice and on maize is considered to be asexual. The role of the sexual stage in the epidemiology of the rice-infecting R. solani is presently not known, as infection by basidiospores has not been reported. Although meiotic basidiospores have been observed in nature, mating reactions have not been easy to detect in vitro for most of the R. solani AGs (CUBETA & VILGALYS, 1997). In contrast to other Basidiomycetes, homokaryons of R. solani cannot be distinguished from heterokaryons due to the multinucleate condition of R. solani hyphae and its lack of clamp connections. Indirect evidence for recombination, however, can be obtained through population genetics approaches. Two studies conducted by our group, which dealt with the population structure of R. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 4> solani AG-1 IA on rice, have provided evidence for recombination in natural populations. Analyses of the population structure of R. solani AG-1 IA from rice in Texas USA indicated that four of seven RFLP loci were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium and only one of 21 possible pairs of loci was in linkage disequilibrium, results consistent with regular cycles of sexual recombination (ROSEWICH et al. 1999). There was no evidence for population subdivision along a 600 km transect in the rice growing areas of Texas, indicating that all isolates were part of the same population of R. solani AG-1 IA. Another analysis of rice-infecting populations of AG-1 IA in India gave similar results, consistent with random mating, local dispersal of a few clones, and significant regional gene flow (LINDE et. al 2005). Our preliminary analysis of data from rice- and maize-infecting R. solani AG-1 IA populations from Panama and Venezuela have also indicated the occurrence of recombination. The three microsatellite loci used for genotyping these populations were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (Table 1). Taken together, all of our data collected from naturally infected field populations to date suggest that R. solani AG-1 IA is more likely to be a sexual pathogen on all of its hosts rather than the asexual pathogen that is portrayed in textbooks. The research proposed in this project will enable a much more thorough test of this hypothesis. Host specialization within anastomosis group 1 Host specialization is common in plant pathogenic fungi, but has not been described with certainty for many AG groups. Within the R. solani complex, a few AG groups are not host specific , e.g., the root rot pathogens AG-4 HGI, HGII and HGIII (SNEH et. al. 1996), but others exhibit clear host specificity, e.g. AG-3 PT and AG-3 TB, which are associated with Solanaceae: the PT group causing black scurf disease on potatoes and AG-3 TB a foliar disease (target spot) on tobacco (CERESINI et al. 2002). For the specific case of AG-1 IA, the only report that supports a lack of host specialization between R. solani isolates obtained from rice and soybean included only a few isolates in the analysis, making it difficult to draw meaningful conclusions (SOUZA et al. 2006, in press). Our preliminary data based on using microsatellite markers to characterize rice and maize-infecting R. solani AG-1 IA populations from Panama, Colombia and Venezuela indicated that 36% (15) of the 42 genotypes we detected were shared among rice and maize populations. More information on host specialization is needed to make decisions regarding appropriate control strategies. For instance, if crop rotations of maize and rice will select for different, host-specialized populations or the same non-specialized population of R. solani AG1-IA. The research proposed in this project will provide significant new insights into the degree of host specialization that occurs for this pathogen. Center of origin SThe ¸ species is worldwide in crop plants, and even occurs commonly in uncultivated areas such as forests, uncultivated desert lands in Idaho and mallee land in Australia. This wide distribution (K. BAKER, 1970) clearly indicates that the fungus has been present for a long timeT As with most plant pathogens, it is still not clear where R. solani AG-1 IA originated. It is often presumed that the center of origin of pathogen and host coincide. However, R. solani AG-1 IA is able to infect hosts from very distinct centers of origin. Rice and soybean have Asiatic centers of origins (mainly located in Southeast Asia or Northern China, respectively) while maize has its c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 5> center of origin in Mesoamerica (SAUER, 1993). From its origins as a domesticated crop in India, Central China and South-East Asia around 10000 BP, Asian rice is thought to have moved to Korea and Japan by 3000 BP and to have reached Africa about 2000 BP (HIGHAM, 1984; MALONEY, 1989, NORMILE, 1997, CHANG, 1975). Rice found its way to the New World in 1647, when it was first grown in the Carolinas (HANCOCK, 2004). Northeastern China was the most likely origin of soybean cultivation about 3000 years ago (HYMOWITZ, 1995). Soybean cultivation then expanded to central and southern China, then into Korea, Japan and South-East Asia, reaching Burma and India by 100 AD (SAUER, 1993). Europeans and then Americans introduced soybeans into North America between 1712 and 1765, but extensive cultivation did not begin until the 20th century. In 1882 soybeans were introduced into Brazil to complete the entry into the New World (HYMOWITZ, 1995). The most significant seed introductions in the New World occurred between 1929-1931 when the US Department of Agriculture collected and introduced about 4000 seed lots from China, Korea and Japan (SAUER, 1993). Thus, both rice and soybeans are quite recent introductions into the New World agroecosystems. From its early cultivation in South-western Mexico before 8000 BP, maize spread throughout Mexico, Central America and into the Southwestern USA over a period of 3000 years (SMITH 1998, 2001). About 6000 BP, maize spread also to South America (BUSH et al. 1989). By the time the Europeans arrived in the Americas, in the 1492, maize was an important staple crop from Argentina to Canada. Likely within a timespan of 100 years, European sailors quickly moved maize to Europe, Africa and Asia. The most widely grown maize in Asia is derived mainly from Caribbeantype flints that were introduced in relatively recent times (SAUER, 1993). Thus the movement of maize from the New World to the Old World also occurred very recently. It is not known whether the R. solani AG1-IA populations infecting each of these crops originated from a single place (i.e. a single center of origin), and then were carried on infected seed and plant parts between Old World and New World, or whether the pathogen populations emerged de novo on each crop on each continent (i.e. multiple centers of origin). In this project, we propose to determine whether the Poaceae-infecting (rice/maize) and Fabaceae-infecting (soybean) populations of R. solani AG-1 IA had a common origin. To address this question, a series of pathogen collections from the different crops in the Old World and New World are needed to ascertain whether R. solani AG-1 IA coevolved with maize, rice, and/or soybean. If host and pathogen coevolved at the same center of origin, then we expected that the directional gene flow patterns of the pathogen will follow the international seed trade (historical and recent) because R. solani AG-1 IA is seed-borne (reference). Detailed research plan Our specific goals in this project are as follows: 1) To determine whether speciation driven by host-specialization is under way or has already occurred between Poaceae-infecting (rice/maize) and Fabaceae-infecting (soybean) populations of Rhizoctonia solani AG-1 IA. In a preliminary study of a soybean-infecting R. solani AG-1 IA population from Brazil, results suggest that the pathogen is composed by two diverging groups/clades within AG-1 IA, perhaps driven by host specialization (Figure 2). 2) To determine the intercontinental genetic structure of geographically distinct Poaceae-infecting c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 6> (rice/maize) and Fabaceae-infecting (soybean) populations of R. solani AG-1 IA. We have already collected and established populations from Asia (China and India), South-Central America (Brazil, Colombia, Panama and Venezuela) and North America (Texas and Louisiana, USA), totaling around 1200 individuals, which will be included in this analysis. As part of this goal, the first objective will be to determine the degree of similarity and genetic relatedness among geographically distinct field populations of the pathogen. A second objective will be to determine the importance of recombination in populations of R. solani AG-1 IA. These populations will be analyzed using a set of microsatellite loci recently developed in our lab as novel molecular marker tools for Rhizoctonia. 3) To determine the phylogeography of Rhizoctonia solani AG-1 IA using DNA sequence loci from the nuclear and mitochondrial genomes. This will provide us with information concerning the center of origin of the pathogen and the directionality of gene flow. We intend to test the hypothesis that these are native pathogens that were selected out of the local environment when the crops (maize, rice, or soybean) were introduced to new continents. Experimental approach and/or methods Host specialization. In this part of the project we will address the following questions: TAre ¸ the Poaceae-infecting (rice/maize) and Fabaceae-infecting (soybean) populations of R. solani genetically differentiated? Do host populations differ in their pathogenicity towards rice, soybean and maize? Is there evidence for host specialization? Null Hypothesis: No differences exist among the pathogen populations isolated from different hosts. Alternate hypotheses: a. Specialized pathogen populations exist for each host population. Populations are reproductively isolated. b. Specialized pathogen populations exist on each host population, but populations are not genetically isolated or are only partially isolated. T ¸ Are Poaceae-infecting (rice/maize) and Fabaceae-infecting (soybean) populations random-mating? Or is the genetic structure more consistent with high levels of clonal reproduction? Null Hypothesis: Based on our findings in Texas and India, populations are random-mating with local dispersal of a few clones. Alternate hypotheses: a. Poaceae-infecting and Fabaceae-infecting populations are mainly clonal. b. Poaceae-infecting and Fabaceae-infecting populations have different degrees of clonality. c. The same pathogen clones are equally effective at colonizing rice, maize and soybeans. We will use several approaches to address these questions. First, Poaceae-infecting (rice/maize) and Fabaceae-infecting (soybean) populations from South America (Venezuela and Brazil) and North America (Louisiana, USA) will be characterized with microsatellite markers to measure genetic differentiation and to make inferences about mating systems. Three groups of host populations from R. solani AG-1 IA will be compared: a) rice and maize-infecting populations from Ve- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 7> nezuela; b) rice and soybean-infecting populations from Tocantins, Brazil; and c) rice and soybeaninfecting populations from Louisiana, USA. In addition to the microsatellite data, the ITS-rDNA region, two mitochondrial genes (atp6 and nad1), and two anonymous nuclear loci (AAC-1 and CT2) from 10 isolates of each population will be sequenced and compared. If host-limited polymorphisms are found in these loci, this will be further evidence for genetic isolation. Finally, genotypic differences will be compared with phenotypic differences. This will include classic pathogenicity studies to determine the cross-pathogenicity of isolates on rice, soybean and maize. These pathogenicity data will be correlated with the level of genetic differentiation found in DNA sequences. Because the three host-derived populations of R. solani AG-1 IA are exotic to Europe, the pathogenicity tests will be conducted using detached leaf assays (rather than living plants) in our containment facility for quarantine pathogens in Eschikon. Intercontinental population genetic structure of Rhizoctonia solani AG-1 IA. In this part of the project, we will address the following questions: T ¸ What is the degree of similarity and genetic relatedness among geographically distinct field populations of the pathogen? Null Hypothesis: No differences exist among populations, indicating significant gene flow over large spatial scales. Alternate hypotheses: a. Isolation by distance is apparent, restricted gene flow occurs over the tested spatial scales. b. Completely isolated populations occur, consistent with separate founder events in each population and no genetic exchange since the founder events. c. Some genetic exchange is indicated between certain groups of populations but not between other groups of populations. T ¸ Are geographically distinct field populations random-mating? Or is the genetic structure more consistent with high levels of clonal reproduction? Null Hypothesis: Populations are random-mating with local dispersal of a few clones. Alternate hypotheses: a. Geographically distinct field populations collected worldwide are mainly clonal. b. Geographically distinct field populations collected worldwide have different degrees of clonality. c. The same pathogen clones are equally effective at colonizing rice, maize and soybeans. Inferences about contemporary patterns of gene flow that exist among pathogen populations and about the importance of sexual reproduction in the population biology of R. solani AG-1 IA will be determined with genetic structure studies using our global collection of R. solani AG-1 IA field populations (Table 2). These populations will be analyzed using a set of microsatellite loci recently developed in our lab for R. solani AG-1 IA. Allele frequencies as well gene and genotype diversities, and measures of association among loci, will be analyzed to determine whether R. solani AG-1 IA reproduces mainly sexually or asexually in populations around the world. Phylogeography of Rhizoctonia solani AG-1 IA. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 8> In this part of the project, we will address the following questions: T ¸ Where did the Poaceae-infecting (rice/maize) and Fabaceae-infecting (soybean) populations originate? T ¸ What historical and contemporary patterns of gene flow exist among these populations? T ¸ Which populations are acting as donors, and which are acting as recipients of gene flow, if it exists? Null Hypothesis: These are native pathogens that were selected out of the local environment when the host was introduced (ie multiple centers of origin). Alternate hypotheses: a. The pathogens were both introduced to the American continent from an outside origin. b. One introduction event gave rise to both host-specific pathogen populations (local adaptation and differentiation following founder event). c. Several, or recurring introductions have come from outside of the American continent, possibly on infected, imported seeds. We are in contact with a Phillipine scientist who may be able to provide populations of R. solani AG-1 IA from maize in the Phillipines. If these populations are added to our collection, we will also be able to test for founder events associated with the movement of maize from the New World to the Old World, i.e. the alternate hypotheses proposed above would also include introductions into Asia. Phylogeographical studies can elucidate the processes that lead to genetic structure of the presentday population. DNA from isolates sampled from the populations listed in Table 2 will be used to determine the phylogeography of R. solani AG-1 IA. In a preliminary study, one of the probes used in previous RFLP studies for R. solani AG-1 IA from rice and three other cloned genomic DNA fragment from R. solani AG-1 IA from soybean were sequenced. Specific primers were designed, and the corresponding loci were amplified, sequenced and screened for variability in nine R. solani AG-1 IA isolates from either rice or soybean from Brazil, India and Texas (Table 3). This preliminary study showed that these four loci are very promising for phylogeography studies and gave an important preliminary result. The maximum parsimony reconstruction of the phylogenetic relationships among these haplotypes consistently indicated that the soybean R. solani AG-1 IA haplotypes constituted a distinct group within AG-1 IA. Due to the heterokaryotic nature of most of the R. solani AG-1 IA isolates, heterogeneous DNA sequences were commonly obtained, consistent with the idea that these strains are functionally diploid though they maintain two discrete nuclei within their mycelium. To separate the individual alleles in each individual prior to sequencing, we could use laborious cloning procedures. Instead, we plan to use a relatively new technology that has been widely applied in human forensic DNA typing. Physical separation of the distinct alleles for each locus will be based on denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography using WAVE-DNA separation columns (ETOKEBE et al. 2003). The distinct DNA molecule fractions, representing separate alleles, can be separated, eluted, and then sequenced using this new technology, which we are implementing in a collaboration with the Institute of Medical Genetics at the University of Zurich. Sequences will be analyzed using the software PAUP4* (SWOFFORD, 2001), TCS1.2 (CLE- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 9> MENT et al. 2000), Geodis2.4 (POSADA et al. 2000) and the software package SNAP workbench (PRICE & CARBONE, 2005), a management tool for evolutionary population genetic analysis, which includes several programs including Migrate (BEERLI & FELSENSTEIN, 1999, 2001), RecPars (HEIN, 1990), MDIV (NIELSEN & WAKELEY, 2001), Genetree, Seq2tr, and Treepic (GRIFFITHS & TAVARÉ, 1994; BAHLO & GRIFFITHS, 2000). All of this software is already available and used regularly in our lab. Based on our previous experience with other pathosystems, e.g. Mycosphaerella graminicola (BANKE et al. 2004), we expect that the phylogeography study will be able to reveal patterns of geographical isolation, historical and contemporary directions of gene flow and the putative center of origin for R. solani AG-1 IA from rice, soybean and maize. Milestones and timetable: Phase 1. Host specialization of Poaceae-infecting and Fabaceae infecting R. solani AG-1 IA populations Milestone 1. Microsatellite genotyping data set completed Milestone 2. Sequencing of the ITS-rDNA and two mitochondrial gene regions completed Milestone 3. Pilot testing for separation of heterogeneous DNA molecules from two nuclear loci (by denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography) completed Milestone 4. Sequencing of the two anonymous nuclear loci completed Milestone 5. Pathogenicity/virulence test completed Milestone 6. Microsatellite genotyping data analysis completed. Milestone 7. Sequence data analysis completed Milestone 8. Correlation analysis between pathogenicity test and genetic differentiation data completed Milestone 9. Manuscript on host specialization completed A manuscript on host specialization of R. solani AG-1 IA answering the question whether speciation is under way between Poaceae-infecting (rice/maize) and Fabaceae-infecting (soybean) populations of R. solani AG-1 IA completes this phase. Phase 2. Intercontinental population genetic structure of R. solani AG-1 IA Milestone 1. Microsatellite genotyping data set completed for Asian population Milestone 2. Microsatellite genotyping data set completed for North American population Milestone 3. Microsatellite genotyping data set completed for South American population Milestone 4. Microsatellite genotyping data analysis completed for all three populations: allele frequencies, gene and genotype diversities, measures of association among loci. Milestone 5. Microsatellite genotyping data analysis completed for all three population: measures of association among loci. Milestone 6. Manuscript on intercontinental population genetics completed. A manuscript on intercontinental population genetics answering the question about levels of gene flow among geographically distinct field populations of the pathogen and on the importance of recombination for R. solani AG-1 IA completes this phase. Phase 3. On the phylogeography and center of origin of R. solani AG-1 IA Milestone 1. Sequencing data set of the four anonymous nuclear loci completed for the Asian population Milestone 2. Analysis of sequencing data and quality checking completed for the Asian population Milestone 3. Sequencing data set of the four anonymous nuclear loci completed for the North c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 10> American population Milestone 4. Analysis of sequencing data and quality checking completed for the North American population Milestone 5. Sequencing data set of the four anonymous nuclear loci completed for South American population Milestone 6. Analysis of sequencing data and quality checking completed for South American population Milestone 7. Statistical data analysis for inferring population evolutionary processes and determining the pathogen center(s) of origin completed Milestone 8. Manuscript on host specialization completed A manuscript on the phylogeography of R. solani AG-1 IA answering the question about the origin of the Poaceae-infecting (rice/maize) and Fabaceae-infecting (soybean) populations completes this phase. Timetable The collection of the infected leaf material from several countries was done this past year. The list of available isolates is presented on Table 2. Isolations, long term storage of fungal cultures, fungal growth for mycelia production and DNA extraction have also been completed in 2005. The marker system for genotyping R. solani AG 1 IA individuals (microsatellite markers) and for DNA sequence analysis (few nuclear and mitochondrial markers) were also developed. Thus, for this investigation, the student can start immediately with the data collection steps. Attached is a tentative schedule for conducting the major phases and to accomplish the milestones within each phase of the investigation. Expected output Our primary output will be knowledge that will be disseminated to the scientific community through publications in refereed journals and through presentations at international meetings. Our research group has assembled during the last year the largest collection of Rhizoctonia solani AG-1 IA in the world. This collection will enable us to address fundamental questions about the biology and evolutionary history of this important pathogenic fungus. Knowledge of the population biology and phylogeography of pathogens is essential to implement sustainable management strategies and to identify sources of infection. It is possible that the results from this project will be useful to plant breeders and government agencies that manage quarantine efforts. Personnel and duties of each participant including doctoral students Will have primary responsibility for all phases of the research, including Dr. Paulo Ceresini U maintenance of fungal collections, further development of microsatellite and DNA sequence marker systems, supervision of the PhD student, and analysis and preparation of data for publications. Will be the Doktorvater for the PhD student and will oversee and manage Prof. Bruce McDonald U the project. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 11> Will manage the fungal collections, collect, analyze and interpret The PhD student (not chosen) U all data, and synthesize the resulting knowledge into a series of publications that describe the population biology of R. solani AG1-IA. Available resources for accomplishing this project Our laboratory has all of the equipment and expertise needed for this study. We have an ABI 3100 16-capillary sequencer necessary for the large number of samples used in this study. A collaboration with the Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich (Dr. Gabor Matyas, matyas@medgen.unizh.ch), will provide us with the denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC, WAVE) facilities for allele separation, before sequencing. A greenhouse and laboratory with containment facilities adequate for exotic pathogens is available in our research station in Eschikon. Significance of the project to the ETH Plant pathogens offer useful model systems for understanding the evolutionary biology of disease. The evolutionary processes that affect plant pathogens also drive the evolution of animal and human pathogens. But there are few ethical boundaries limiting the type of research that can be conducted with plant pathogens. Thus plants can be deliberately infected, epidemics involving thousands of plants can be allowed to run a natural course, and infected plants can be dissected easily to understand in great detail the mechanisms that drive pathogen evolution. Our research group now has the largest collection of R. solani AG1-IA in the world, and we amassed this collection with this project in mind. This enables us to address fundamental questions about the biology and evolutionary history of this important group of pathogenic fungi. We expect that knowledge acquired in the course of this research will allow a better understanding of processes affecting other Rhizoctonia solani anastomosis groups, and could act as a catalyst for further research on this important group of pathogens. Knowledge of the population biology and phylogeography of pathogens is essential to implement sustainable disease management strategies and identify sources of infection. It is possible that results from this project will prove useful to plant breeders by offering insight into centers of origin and thus possible sources of resistance genes to use in cultivated crops, as well as government agencies that manage quarantine efforts through identification of source populations of immigration. Further information This project forms part of a collaboration agreement between ETH Zurich and the University of Sao Paulo State (UNESP), which allowed Dr. Ceresini to leave his post as Assistant Professor at UNESP and accept a temporary (4-year) position as Obserassistent in our research group, contributing his extensive expertise in the Rhizoctonia pathosystem. The existing collaboration agreement will allow us to receive another PhD student supported by the Brazilian government. This PhD student will contribute a complementary research project focused on the population genetics of R. solani AG-1 IA from soybean in Brazil. Relevant literature from applicants BANKE, S., PESCHON, A., MCDONALD B.A. (2004). Phylogenetic analysis of globally dis- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 12> tributed Mycosphaerella graminicola populations based on three DNA sequence loci. Fungal Genetics and Biology 41:226-238. BANKE, S., MCDONALD, B.A. (2005) Migration patterns among global populations of the pathogenic fungus Mycosphaerella graminicola. Molecular Ecology 14:1881-1896. CERESINI, P. C., SHEW, H. D., VILGALYS, R., GALE, L. R., CUBETA, M. A. (2003) Detecting migrants in populations of Rhizoctonia solani Anastomosis Group 3 from potato in North Carolina using multilocus genotype probabilities. Phytopathology 93 (5):610-615. CERESINI, P. C., SHEW, H. D., VILGALYS, R., ROSEWICH, U. L., CUBETA, M. A. (2002) Genetic structure of populations of Rhizoctonia solani AG-3 on potato in eastern North Carolina. Mycologia 94(3): 437-447. CERESINI, P. C., SHEW, H. D., VILGALYS, R. J. , CUBETA, M. A. (2002) Genetic diversity of Rhizoctonia solani AG-3 from potato and tobacco in North Carolina. Mycologia 94:437-449. CIAMPI, M.B.; KURAMAE, E.E.; FENILLE, R.C.; MEYER, M.C.; SOUZA, N.L.; CERESINI, P.C. (2005). Intraspecific evolution of Rhizoctonia solani AG-1 IA associated with soybean and rice in Brazil based on polymorphisms at the ITS-5.8S rDNA operon. European Journal of Plant Pathology 113: 183U196. LINDE, C.C.; ZALA, M.; PAULRAJ, R.S.D.; MCDONALD, B.A.; GNANAMANICKAM, S.S. (2005). Population structure of the rice sheath blight pathogen Rhizoctonia solani AG-1 IA from India. European Journal of Plant Pathology 112: 113-121. ROSEWICH, U.L.; PETTWAY, R.E.; MCDONALD, B.A.; KISTLER, H.C. (1999) High levels of gene flow and heterozygote excess characterize Rhizoctonia solani AG-1 IA (Thanatephorus cucumeris). Fungal Genetics and Biology 28: 148-159. SOUZA, E.C.; BASSETO, M.A.; PRABHU, A.S.; CERESINI, P.C. (2006) Caracterização citomorfológica, cultural, molecular e patogênica de Rhizoctonia solani Kühn associada ao arroz em Tocantins, Brasil. Summa Phytopatologica 32 (in press). Relevant literature from others ADAMS, G. C. (1996) Genetics of Rhizoctonia species. In: SNEH, B.; JABAJI-HARE, S.; NEATE, S.; DIJST, G. (Ed.) Rhizoctonia species: taxonomy, molecular biology, ecology, pathology and disease control. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic. pp.11-16. AHN, S.W.; MEW, T.W. (1986) Relation between rice sheath blight (ShB) and yield. International Rice Research Newsletter 11 (5): 21-22. BAHLO, M.; GRIFFITHS, R. C. (2000) Inference from gene trees in a subdivided population. Theor. Pop. Biol. 57: 79-95. BAKER, K. F. (1970) Types of Rhizoctonia diseases and their occurrence. In: Parmeter Jr., J.R. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 13> (ed.). Rhizoctonia solani, biology and pathology. Berkeley: University of California Press, pp.125160. BEERLI, P.; FELSENSTEIN, J. (1999) Maximum-likelihood estimation of migration rates and effective population numbers in two populations using a coalescent approach. Genetics 152: 763773 BEERLI, P.; FELSENSTEIN, J. (2001) Maximum likelihood estimation of a migration matrix and effective population sizes in n subpopulations using a coalescent approach. PNAS 98: 45634568. BLACK, B. D.; GRIFFIN, J. L.; RUSSIN, J. S. SNOW, J. P. (1996) Weed hosts for Rhizoctonia solani, causal agent for rhizoctonia foliar blight of soybean (Glycine max). Weed Technology 10: 865-869. BUSH, M.B.; PIPERNO, D.R.; COLINVAUX, P.A. (1989) A 6,000 year story of Amazonian maize cultivation. Nature 340: 303-305. CARLING, D.E. (1996) Grouping in Rhizoctonia solani by hyphal anastomosis reaction. In: SNEH, B.; JABAJI-HARE, S.; NEATE, S.; DIJST, G. (Ed.) Rhizoctonia species: taxonomy, molecular biology, ecology, pathology and disease control. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic. p.37-47. CHANG, T.T. (1975) Exploration and survey in rice. In: FRANKEL, O.H.; HAWKES, J.G. (Eds.). Crop genetic resources for today and tomorrow: Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press. pp.159-165. CHANG, Y.C. (1986). Studies on the effect of disease severity of sheath blight on rice yield. Journal of Agricultural Research of China 35 (2):202-209. CLEMENT, M.; POSADA, D.; CRANDALL, K.A. (2000) TCS: a computer program to estimate gene genealogies. Molecular Ecology 9: 1657-1660 CUBETA, M.A.; VILGALYS, R. Population biology of the Rhizoctonia solani complex. Annual Review of Phytopathology 87: 480 484, 1997. ETOKEBE, G.E.; OPSAHL, M.; TVETER, A.K.; LIE, B.A., THORSBY, E.; VARTDAL, F.; SPURKLAND, A. (2003) Physical separation of HLA-A alleles by denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography. Tissue Antigens 61(6):443-450. FENILLE R.C.; SOUZA, N.L.; KURAMAE, E.E. (2002) Characterization of Rhizoctonia sola ni associated with soybean in Brazil. European Journal of Plant Pathology 108: 783U792 FENILLE, R.C.; CIAMPI, M.B.; KURAMAE, E.E.; SOUZA, N.L. (2003) Identification of Rhizoctonia solani associated with soybean in Brazil by rDNA-ITS sequences. Fitopatologia Brasileira 28:413-419. FLENTJE, N.T.; STRETTON, H.M.; MCKENZIE, A.R. (1970) Mechanisms of variation in Rhizoctonia solani. In: PARMETER, Jr., J.R. (Ed.) Rhizoctonia solani: biology and pathology. Berke- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 14> ley: Univ. of California Press. p.52-65. GONZALEZ, D.; CARLING, D.E.; KUNINAGA, S.; VILGALYS, R.; CUBETA, M.A. (2001) Ribosomal DNA systematics of Ceratobasidium and Thanatephorus with Rhizoctonia anamorphs. Mycologia 93: 1138-1150. GRIFFITHS, R. C.; TAVARÉ, S. (1994). Ancestral inference in population genetics. Stat. Sci. 9: 307-319. HANCOCK, J. F. (2004) Plant evolution and the origin of crop species. 2.ed. Cambridge: CABI Publishing. 336 p. HEIN, J. (1990). Reconstructing evolution of sequences subject to recombination using parsimony. Math. Biosci. 98: 185-200. HIGHAN, C.F.W. (1984). Prehistoric rice cultivation in southeast Asia. Scientific American 250:138146 Papilionoidae). In: SMARZZ, HYMOWITZ, T. (1995). Soybean: Glycine max (Leguminosae U J.; SIMMONDS, N.W. (Eds.) Evolution of crop plants. Harlow: Longman Scientific & Technical, pp. 261-266. JONES, R. K.; BELMAR, S. B. (1989) Characterization and pathogenicity of Rhizoctonia spp. isolated from rice, soybean, and other crops grown in rotation with rice in Texas. Plant Disease 73: 1004-1010. MALONEY, B.K.; HIGHAM, C.F.W.; BANNANURAG, R. 1989. Early rice cultivation in Southeast Asia: archeological and palynological evidence from the Bang Pakong Valley, Thailand. Antiquity 63: 363-370. MARCHETTI, M.A.; BOLLICH, C.N. (1991) Quantification of the relationship between sheath blight severity and yield loss in rice. Plant Disease 75, n.8: 773-775. MEYER, M. C. Caracterização de Rhizoctonia solani Kühn, agente causal da mela da soja [Glycine max (L.) Merrill], seleção de genótipos e controle químico. Botucatu, 2001. 125p. Tese (Douto Faculdade de Ciências Agronômicas, Universidade Estadual rado em em Proteção de Plantas) U Paulista SJúlio ¸ de Mesquita FilhoT. MEYER, M. C.; YORINORI, J. T. (1999) Incidência de doenças da soja em regiões tropicais. In: CONGRESSO BRASILEIRO DE SOJA, Londrina, 1999. Londrina: Embrapa Soja, 1999. p.457 (Documentos, 124). MUYOLLO, N.G.; LIPPS: E.; SCHMITTHENNER, A.F. (1993) Reactions of dry bean, lima bean, and soybean cultivars to Rhizoctonia root and hypocotyls rot and web blight. Plant Disease 77: 23 4-238. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 15> NIELSEN, R.; WAKELEY, J. (2001) Distinguishing migration from isolation: a Markov chain Monte Carlo approach. Genetics 158: 885-896. NORMILE, D. (1997) Yangtze seen as earliest rice site. Science 275:309-310. OSNEILL, N. R.; RUSH, M. C.; HORN, N. L.; CARVER, R. B. (1977) Aerial blight of soybeans caused by Rhizoctonia solani. Plant Disease Reporter 61: 713-717. OGOSHI, A. (1987) Ecology and pathogenicity of anastomosis and intraspecific groups of Rhizoctonia solani Kühn. Annual Review Phytopathology 25: 125-143. OHTA, K.; SHIMADA, K. (1990) A computer simulation model for rice sheath blight disease. 3. Effect of the time of outbreak on yield losses of the disease. Annual Report of the Society of Plant Protection of North Japan 41: 31-34. PASCUAL, C.B.; TODA, T.; RAYMONDO, A.D.; HYAKUMACHI, M. (2000) Characterization by conventional techniques and PCR of Rhizoctonia solani isolates causing banded leaf sheath blight in maize. Plant Pathology 49:108U118. PASCUAL, C.B; HYAKUMACHI, M. (2000) Distribution of vegetatively compatible populations of Rhizoctonia solani AG-1 IA in a field planted with different host species. J. Gen. Plant Pathology 66:206-209. POSADA, D.; CRANDALL, K.A.; TEMPLETON, A.R. (2000) GeoDis: a program for the cladistic nested analysis of the geographical distribution of genetic haplotypes. Molecular Ecology 9: 487U488. PRICE, E.W.; CARBONE, I. (2005) SNAP: workbench management tool for evolutionary population genetic analysis. Bioinformatics 21:402-404. RAJAN, C.P.D. (1987) Estimation of yield losses due to sheath blight disease of rice. Indian Phytopathology 40 (2): 174-177. SAUER, J. D. (1993). Historical geography of crop plants: a select roster. Boca Raton: CRC Press. 320p. SAXENA, S.C. (2002) Bioi-intensive integrated disease management of banded leaf and sheath blight of maize. . In: Proceedings of the 8th Asian regional maize workshop, Bangkok, Thailand, 2002. p.380-390 SHARMA, R.C.; VASAL, S.K.; GONZALES, F.; BATSA, B.K.; SINGH, N.N. (2002). Redressal of banded leaf and sheath blight of maize through breeding, chemical control and biocontrol agents. In: Proceedings of the 8th Asian regional maize workshop, Bangkok, Thailand, 2002. p.391-397. SMITH, B.D. (1998) The emergence of agriculture. New York: Scientific American Library. SMITH, B.D. (2001) Documenting planting domestication: the consilience of biological and ar- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 16> cheological approaches. PNAS 98:1324-1326. SNEH, B.; JABAJI-HARE, S.; NEATE, S.; DIJST, G. (1996) Rhizoctonia species: taxonomy, molecular biology, ecology, pathology and disease control. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic, 1996. SWOFFORD, D. L. (2001) PAUP*. Phylogenetic analysis using parsimony (*and other methods). Version 4. Sunderland, Massachusetts: Sinauer Associates (Software). YANG, X.B.; BERGGREEN G.T.; SNOW, J.T. (1990) Seedling infection of soybean by isolates of Rhizoctonia solani AG-1, the causal agent of aerial blight and web blight of soybean. Plant Disease 74: 485-488. YORINORI, J. T. (1998) Estratégias de controle das doenças da soja. Correio Agrícola, São Paulo, 2: 8-12.