  Scientific Support for the International Risk Governance Council (IRGC) in the Field of Critical Infrastructures  
Risk associated with individual infrastructures, such as electric power supply, information and communication, transport and their interdependencies; (social) vulnerabilities to disruption of operation / service.
The IRGC in an idependent public private partnership dedicated to improving how changing traditional and emerging systemic risks are addressed and managed. It supports decision makers by proving authoritative information and designing innovative governance strategies at a global level. The risks associated with, and the vulnerabilities of, critical infrastructures have been a priority for IRGC since its founding in 2003. Attention was drawn to them not only by the complexity and vulnerabilities of the infrastructures themselves, but also by the criticality of the services they provide and by their being subject to fundamental changes in technology and in ownership and market structures. such Our work in this field focuses both on the risks associated with individual infrastructures U as the electrical supply system and rail transport U and the risks associated with the increasing as in the use of information and communication technologies interdependence between them U (ICT) to perform business processes and to monitor and control almost all critical infrastructures. We have therefore taken an approach which examines each system and its operational environment ´ separately but which also views the interdependent infrastructures as a highly complex Ssystem of systemsS. We began 2005 focusing on the risks associated with the European electric power system (which we defined as the potential loss of continuous power supply and the secondary consequences of such a loss), on the risks associated with the use of ICT to monitor and control performance, and the risks associated with the interdependency between the two systems. The objectives of the study were inter alia to examine the European electric power system as a critical infrastructure linked to and interdependent with other vital systems (e.g. ICT); secondly, to and of trends in the foreidentify weaknesses and vulnerabilities within this Smega-infrastructure ¸ T seeable future; thirdly, to identify potential technical and non-technical solutions to certain threats and vulnerabilities (recommendations) which may cause end-user disruptions and to suggest areas c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> requiring further research. The results were published as an authored book. From May 2005, IRGCSs focus broadened and we began an examination of five critical infrastruc electric power supply, gas supply, systems for general information and communication tures U services, urban water supply and waste water treatment, and rail transport. These share a number of similarities. For example, all involve distributed complex physical networks and are organised along similar value chains with elements embedded within the socio-political-economic framework, and their operating strategies and end-user behaviours are subject to significant and evolving contextual changes and risk-shaping factors. ´ Project work has involved a definition of Scritical infrastructuresS and an overview of the physical structure and of the governance structures and processes of each of the five critical infrastructures. It has also included an exploration of such issues as the factors which have promoted and caused tighter integration and greater interdependency among critical infrastructures and the vulnerabilities and main drivers behind this tighter integration including possible political and institutional short-comings. Based on our findings we have developed proposals for technical, management and organisational strategies needed to reduce social vulnerabilities to disruption of these systems as well as recommendations for policy options that could be used to promote the adoption of such socially desirable technical, management and organisational strategies. The report has been drafted, externally reviewed and revised and will be published as an IRGC White Paper. IRGC intends to commence a new project in the field of critical infrastructures in the second half of 2006.