  Soil Restoration in Indonesian Mixed Agroforests (Doctoral Research Project) 
We will assess the effect of shade-tree diversity on soil fertility in cacao  production systems in Indonesia. We will measure soil structure, nutrient and water cycling, and SOM and evaluate farmer knowledge about soils. Study results are expected to improve livelihoods of smallholder farmers.
T ¸ Description In degraded agricultural systems, soils become depleted of plant-essential water and nutrients and productivity starts to decline. This generally occurs when soil structure and biochemical properties have been altered through intensive management practices in a way that reduces nutrient recycling and increases water loss through the system. Soil structural alterations impact soil structure in terms of pore size and connectivity, particle size and stability, as well as soil water and nutrient holding capacity. Biochemical alterations impact the functional diversity and size of soil biota communities, which in turn affect the size of plant-available water and nutrient pools and can play important roles in enhancing plant uptake rates. In the research area of Sulawesi Tenggara (Southeast Sulawesi), cocoa is the principal crop and there are growing concerns due to current trends towards shade removal and deforestation linked to cocoa production. Unfortunately these practices contribute to long-term decreases in soil fertility and increases in pest and disease occurrences, but diversified agroforests might present a way to reverse such trends. The main drivers of deforestation are linked to the growing number of rural settlers looking for new land to cultivate and to the degradation of converted land due to unsustainable management practices. While monoculture production assures higher yields in the short term, it has been recognized that such plantations are not sustainable in the long-term. On the other hand, diversified, shaded cocoa agroforests have been recognized to contribute to above- and belowground biodiversity and generate more stable incomes than monocultures through the possibility of year-round income from different crops. They also provide environmental benefits such as increased ecosystem resilience to extreme weather events, and have the potential to contribute significantly to food security, climate change mitigation, and ecosystem conservation. While the importance of agroforests as viable systems for ecosystem service conservation is recognized, there have been few studies to date carried out under field conditions to observe the impacts of cacao system typology on soil structure, nutrient cycling, and crop productivity. Ultimately, the research will feed into a collaboration with the World Agroforestry Center (ICRAF) current AgFor project in Indonesia. The AgFor project seeks to improve livelihoods, governance, and environmental conditions for smallholder farmers in the Indonesian provinces of South and Southeast Sulawesi. The projectSs overall goal is to investigate existing cocoa systems by capitalizing on shade tree diversity and tree cover to improve the sustainability and resilience of cocoa agroforestry systems (i.e. long-term consistent production and healthy soils). Additionally, we will evaluate farmer perceptions and knowledge of the effects of shade trees on ecosystem processes and yields, in order to better understand the factors that lead to decision-making about the adoption of agroforestry management practices. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> Our principal objectives are to: 1. Quantify the interactions between cacao agroforest typology and input management, and the effects on SOM stabilization and aggregate dynamics. 2. Determine the impact of management choices on nutrient use efficiency and plot productivity in cacao agroforests. 3. Provide new insights in the mechanisms linking water use efficiency and nutrient use efficiency through soil structure elements. 4. Evaluate farmer perceptions and knowledge about soil processes and quality, and how these influence decision-making regarding management practices. T ¸ Materials and methods : Project objectives will be reached through the following planned research: 1. Definition of agroforest typology across a tree-diversity gradient to reflect variation in tree cover gradients, and selection of study plots. The different typologies will be defined to describe variation in shade-tree diversity and density across a gradient, ranging from secondary forest to monoculture plantations. 2. Quantification of the effect of tree diversity on soil fertility, carbon sequestration and soil stabilization along a shade-tree intensification gradient. Soil samples will be collected from the previously selected plots and will be analyzed using physical fractionation techniques in order to assess SOM stabilization. Additionally, N, P and C concentrations will be measured in bulk soil, aggregates and plant material, and CEC and base saturation will measured across all field sites. 3. As a follow up to the first two research points, more in-depth research will be conducted to quantify the effect of individual trees on soil fertility, carbon sequestration and soil stabilization. 4. Direct farmer interviews and/or household surveys will be conducted to supplement the data collected, particularly regarding fertilizer management and obtained yields per plot. This data will be used to analyze the socio-economic components of the research and to draw conclusions regarding links between land-use management, nutrient use efficiency and plot productivity. T ¸ Equipment used 1. Soil sampling equipment (5.5 cm and 1 cm soil augers for core extraction, field tape, etc.) 2. Soil processing equipment (8mm, 2mm, 250 ¸ tm, 53 ¸ tm sieves) 3. Soil storage equipment (cooler, ziploc bags, etc.) T ¸ Preliminary results and discussion : June 2014. The main objectives A first data-collection campaign was carried out from March U of this visit were to (i) define agroforest typology based on tree species recorded, (ii) measure the impacts of cocoa agroforest typology on soil fertility (via an assessment of soil aggregation, C-N-P contents and a phospholipid fatty-acid analysis on soil samples, and (iii) gather preliminary information from farmers regarding plot history and management methods. Preliminary results consist of a more detailed description of field sites and agroforest typologies encountered (see sections below). Data analysis for the collected samples is still underway and results and discussion will be shared once it is completed. 1. Site Description The field sites for this study consist of three villages which are structured slightly differently and located in the Konawe province in Sulawesi Tenggara (Figure 3). Figure 3. Konawe province in Sulawesi Tenggara c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> T ¸ Lawonua (Figure 4) is located about 25km (as the crow flies) outside of Kendari. It is the oldest of the three villages, and has been settled continuously since its establishment. For this reason it is located furthest from primary forest. The village is set in a valley and bordered by rice fields and palm-oil plantations, as well as some secondary forest fields. T ¸ Wonuahoa is located 60 km (as the crow flies) outside of Kendari. The village is laid out in a narrow valley, with planted fields mainly established along the flat part of the valley. Farmland extends up into the hills but is less managed as one goes further up the slopes. Behind the village, deeper in the valley there is primary forest which is a destination for logging activity. Many farmers donSt live permanently in the village and have their primary residences closer to the main road running through Konawe district, although they often stay on their plots overnight during the harvest season. vilT ¸ Asinua is located 90 km (as the crow flies) outside of Kendari and is still more of a Sfrontier ¸ T lage. It is surrounded by primary forest and is also a destination for logging activity, which seems to be the main source of income for most farmers. The village itself is laid out along the river, but the cacao plots are located higher up in the adjacent hills. Plots have been allocated along a path in half-hectare parcels. Similarly to Wonuahoa, farmers donSt live permanently on their plots and often return to their primary homes in the main village in the evenings. Figure 4. Plot locations for the 15 selected plots in the village of Lawonua 2. Variations in tree diversity The dominant crops in the three study sites were cacao, rubber, and gliricidia with pepper vines. The most common types of observed cacao agro-forests were simple agro-forests with intercropped cacao and gliricidia-pepper, durian, rambutan or rubber trees. In terms of planting arrangements and tree diversity, there is more variation within each village than between the three villages. 3. Variations in physical characteristics across selected plots Field sites were selected to minimize variations in geophysical characteristics, such as slope and soil depth. Additional site characteristics were recorded carefully and will be taken into account during the data analysis phase of the project. 4.Variations in ownership and management approaches across selected plots Variations in ownership, plot history, and management approaches (including fertilizing and pesticide application regimes) were recorded carefully and will be taken into account during the data analysis phase of the project). T ¸ Relevant literature Aguiar, A. d. C. F., Cândido, C. S., Carvalho, C. S., Monroe, P. H. M., & de Moura, E. G. (2013). Organic matter fraction and pools of phosphorus as indicators of the impact of land use in the Amazonian periphery. Ecological Indicators, 30, 158-164. Belsky, J. M., & Siebert, S. F. (2003). Cultivating cacao Implications of sun-grown cacao on local food security and environmental sustainability. Agriculture and Human Values, 20(3), 277285.Bronick, C., & Lal, R. (2005). Soil structure and management: a review. Geoderma, 124(1), 3-22. Clough, Y., Faust, H., & Tscharntke, T. (2009). Cacao boom and bust: sustainability of agroforests and opportunities for biodiversity conservation. Conservation Letters, 2(5), 197-205. Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). (2011). Save and Grow [Accessed July 2012] http://www.fao.org/ag/sav and-grow/ Fonte, S. J., & Six, J. (2010). Earthworms and litter management contributions to ecosystem services in a tropical agroforestry system. Ecological Applications, 20(4), 1061-1073. Franzluebbers, A. (2002). Water infiltration and soil structure related to organic matter and its stra- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 4> tification with depth. Soil and Tillage Research, 66(2), 197-205. Gama-Rodrigues, E., Gama-Rodrigues, A., & Nair, P. R. (2011). Soil carbon sequestration in cacao agroforestry systems: a case study from Bahia, Brazil Carbon Sequestration Potential of Agroforestry Systems (pp. 85-99): Springer. Hafich, K., Perkins, E., Hauge, J., Barry, D., & Eaton, W. D. (2012). Implications of land management on soil microbial communities and nutrient cycle dynamics in the lowland tropical forest of northern Costa Rica. Tropical Ecology, 53(2), 215-224. Li, Y., & Shao, M. (2006). Change of soil physical properties under long-term natural vegetation restoration in the Loess Plateau of China. Journal of Arid Environments, 64(1), 77-96. Pauli, N., Barrios, E., Conacher, A., & Oberthür, T. (2012). Farmer knowledge of the relationships among soil macrofauna, soil quality and tree species in a smallholder agroforestry system of western Honduras. Geoderma, 189, 186-198. Schmidhalter, U., & Studer, C. (1998). Water-Use Efciency as Inuenced by Plant Mineral Nutrition. Song, C.-J., Ma, K.-M., Qu, L.-Y., Liu, Y., Xu, X.-L., Fu, B.-J., & Zhong, J.-F. (2010). Interactive effects of water, nitrogen and phosphorus on the growth, biomass partitioning and water-use efficiency of< i> Bauhinia faberi</i> seedlings. Journal of Arid Environments, 74(9), 1003-1012.