  The Role of the University in Our Time  
The project reflect on the role, prospect and viability conditions of current research universities, focusing on the orientation of universities in a globalized world, the interplay of autonomy and political control and the connection between university organization and research  dynamics.
1 Key Topics The conference shall reect on the role, prospect and viability conditions of re nsearch universities at the beginning of the 21st century. Key topics include: Goals: the orientation and diversity of universities in a globalized world dom ninated by economic paradigms, including the relationship between science and society [19, 22]; Governance: the interplay of institutional autonomy and political control of universities [8]; Focus: the roles of the unity of teaching and research [21], basic versus ap nplied sciences, and general versus professional education; Organization: the connection between the organizational codes and rules [17], structural (i.e. morphological) aspects of university organization [6], and the dynamics, diversity and propagation of research and knowledge; Monitoring: the assessment and measurement of productivity in higher ed nucation [9, 14], considering various academic traditions. The work of Joseph Ben-David (1920-1986) serves as a starting point for these reections [2, 3, 4, 5]. 2 Objectives The conference is to take place in the context of a planned anthology commemo nrating Ben early in 2011; the tentative title of this book is SUniversity DavidSs 25th SJahrzeit ¸ T ¸ and Scientic Productivity: the Legacy of Joseph Ben-DavidT. Since we believe Ben-DavidSs ideas are central to todaySs discussions on higher educa ntion and research policies and deserve a wide audience, we would like to take this occasion to reect anew on the scholar himself, on his conceptual legacy, and on its relevance for an understanding of todaySs situation in higher education and the role of the sciences in contemporary societies. The conference ought to serve as a meeting ground where chapter drafts for this anthology can be presented, dis ncussed, assessed and enriched by an international group of scholars representing various disciplinary orientations. To take advantage of this international, inter-disciplinary gathering, and in or nder to focus on local issues and interests, the conference shall also include speakers and participants not directly involved as authors of the planned anthology, such as scholars who are not specialized in the sociology of knowledge, representatives of higher education institutions or policy agencies, doctoral and Master-students, as well as journalists, politicians and laypeople interested in matters of education and higher education policy. A second publication shall address policy issues of todaySs higher education landscape. 3 State of the Art Higher education research, that is, research on higher education (and research) institutions or systems, is fragmented. A range of disciplinary representatives fo ncus on this broad topic, such as historians (dealing with the history of universities, research institutions or disciplines), sociolo- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> gist (dealing with the sociology of sci nence or the sociology of knowledge), philosophers (dealing with the philosophy of science), economists (dealing with funding problems, economic impact, pro nductivity or agglomeration economies), political scientists (dealing with science or education policies), or higher education representatives, both scholars and ad nministrators (dealing with various aspects in their attempt to describe or improve educational institutions or systems). In general, this discourse takes place in dis ntinct circles separated by their disciplinary orientation. The intellectual starting point of the conference is Ben-David and his analysis of higher education and research systems. Ben-David is one of those scholars who addressed a broad range of issues, transgressing various disciplines, in particular history, sociology, political science, philosophy, and education. Moreover, a range of his theses can be used as starting points of economic analyses. In 1991, Gad Freudenthal published a very valuable collection of Ben-DavidSs papers under the [5]. This book, title SScientic ¸ Growth: Essays on the Social Organization and Ethos of ScienceT together with SThe ¸ ScientistSs Role in Society: A Comparative StudyT [2], and SCenters ¸ of Lear ningT [4], forms the corpus of work Ben-David is remembered by. A range of publications exist which reect on Ben-DavidSs ideas, but many of these are dated to some extent and lack todaySs perspective. In various contexts, Joseph Ben-David studied science or knowledge systems. His overarching concern was, to put it in economic terms, the performance of these systems as they relate to, and are governed by, various organizational or cultural aspects of the broader social systems to which they belonged. These issues are of particular relevance for todaySs discussions in science politics, such as: science planning, coordination, and laissez faire; U science and economic prosperity; U universities and their role as harbors of basic (fundamental) sciences, applied sciences, and proU fessions; universities versus research societies as agents of research; U conditions for scientic growth; U mass higher education and diversity; U formation and spread of disciplines; U research performance and institutional organization. U Apart from these, he also addressed more theoretical issues in the elds of philos nophy of science or sociology of knowledge. Higher education research is a broad eld and the major contributions are too numerous to mention in a short memo. It is perhaps important to point out here the elds or issues where research is to be further developed. Interest in the soci nology of science [18], with hindsight to its institutions and to the development of disciplines, has subsided in recent decades, and the focus has shifted to a sociology, history and philosophy of scientic knowledge and mainly its practices. Although these [16], we believe it is worth to revisit studies have uncovered mechanisms of Sscience ¸ in actionT issues of institutions, disciplines, and the roles of scientists in their respective elds as well as in society. There is a certain tendency to engage in comparative analysis of higher education systems, particularly in the context of the European Union, but few modern analyses have the normative impact of earlier efforts [8, 10, 13]. There is an ongoing interest regarding science as a Smotor ¸ of economic developmentT [12]. New developments point in the direction of eco nnomics of science and agglomeration economies [11], the formation and spread of disciplines [1], and network and organization theory [7], taking up some earlier leads [15, 20]. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> 4 Expected Scientic Impact The conference, and the associated publications, will make an effort to pull to ngether disparate disciplinary efforts to address science and higher education sys ntems and their development. It is hoped that this cross-disciplinary approach will enrich the spectrum of theses with respect to the workings of higher education and research systems, and that it will spawn research efforts that are based on this broader spectrum of theses. Two foci stand in the foreground: (i) a reassessment of Joseph Ben-DavidSs position and an assessment of the role of his ideas with regard to todaySs (and tomorrowSs) university; and (ii) practical implications regarding universities as well as higher education and research systems in their mission to serve their respective societies and their ght to ° and survive in U ° a changing environment and a globalized world. adapt to U References Andrew Abbott, Chaos of Disciplines, The University of Chicago Press, 2001. Joseph Ben-David, The ScientistSs Role in Society: A Comparative Analysis, Prentice-Hall, 1971. , American Higher Education: Directions Old and New, McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1972. , Centers of Learning: Britain, France, Germany, United States, McGraw-Hill, 1977. , Scientic Growth: Essays on the Social Organization and Ethos of Sci nence, University of California Press, 1991. Pierre Bourdieu, Homo Academicus, Stanford University Press (Les Editions de Minuit), 1988 (1984). Nicolas Carayol and Mireille Matt, Does Research Organization Inuence Academic Production? Laboratory Level Evidence from a Large European University, Research Policy 33 (2004), 1081U1102. Burton R. Clark, The Higher Education System: Academic Organizations in Cross-National Perspective, University of California Press, 1983. Mario Coccia, A Scientometric Model for the Assessment of Scientic Re nsearch Performance wi thin Public Institutes, Scientometrics 65 (2005), no. 3, 307U321. Abraham Flexner, Universities: American, English, German, pp. xxxiiiU381, Oxford University Press, 1930. Masahisa Fujita and Jacques-François Thisse, Economics of Agglomeration: Cities, Industrial Location, and Regional Growth, Cambridge University Press, 2002. Zvi Griliches, R&D, Education, and Productivity: A Retrospective, Harvard University Press, 2000. A.H. Halsey and Martin A. Trow, The British Academics, Harvard University Press, 1971. Marcel Herbst, Financing Public Universities: The Case of Performance Fund ning, Springer Science + Business Media, 2007. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 4> John Hurley, Organisation and Scientic Discovery, John Wiley & Sons, 1997. Bruno Latour, Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists and Engineers through Society, Harvard University Press, 1988. James G. March, Martin Schulz, and Xueguang Zhou, The Dynamics of Rules: Change in Written Organizational Codes , Stanford University Press, 2000. Robert K. Merton, On Social Structure and Science, The University of Chicago Press, 1996. Helga Nowotny, Peter Scott, and Michael Gibbons, Rethinking Science: Knowledge and the Public in an Age of Uncertainty, Polity Press, 2001. Donald C. Pelz and Frank M. Andrews, Scientists in Organizations: Produc ntive Climates for Research and Development, Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan, 1976. Rainer Christoph Schwinges (ed.), Humboldt International: Der Export des deutschen Universiätsmodells im 19. und 20. Jahrhundert, Veröffentlichun ngen der Gesellschaft für Universitäts-und Wissenschaftsgeschichte, vol. 3, Schwabe & Co., 2001. Peter Weingart, Die Stunde der Wahrheit?, Velbrück, 2001.