  Long-term Resistance of Gradient Anchorage for Prestressed CFRP Strips in Structural Concrete Retrofitting  
The goal of this project is to investigate the influence 1) of carbonation,  2) of freeze-thaw cycles as well as 3) of a combination of elevated temperature and high relative humidity on the long-term gradient anchorage resistance for Prestressed Carbon Fiber Reinforced Polymer (CFRP) strips.
Prestressed Carbon Fiber Reinforced Polymer (CFRP) strips are increasingly used for retrofitting of existing deteriorated structures. This technique comes with a number of advantages proven to be substantial in a short-term horizon. However, although very little so far explored in the literature, the outer environment (temperature, moisture) holds a major effect in the long-term behavior of an externally bonded reinforcement (EBR) made of CFRP. The different components, i.e., the concrete substrate, the epoxy resin, as well as the CFRP strip undergo different ageing processes. The nature of these degradation phenomena (such as tensile strength reduction due to an expansion of initial microcracks) or creep behavior under different temperature and moisture conditions for will have a strong impact on the long-term durability of the so-called Sgradient ¸ anchorageT prestressed CFRP strip. The fact that the mentioned anchorage technique is purely based on the bond behavior between the different constituents renders an investigation on durability absolutely necessary. The aim of the analysis is to extend the short-term design criteria, developed for such solutions in the PhD thesis of C. Czaderski, into a long-term horizon. The goal is to investigate the influence 1) of carbonation, 2) of freeze-thaw cycles as well as 3) of a combination of elevated temperature and high relative humidity on the long-term gradient anchorage resistance. In end the specimens will be tested under static load in order to determine the residual anchorage resistance. It is expected that the most critical components are the concrete substrate and the epoxy resin, but also the respective interfaces CFRP/epoxy and epoxy/concrete are of high interest. The project will be separated into an experimental and numerical simulation track. Experimental investigations on lap-shear specimens with an initial prestress force release will be used to assess long-term static residual anchorage resistances after the mentioned exposure conditions. It is important to point out that these test specimens considerably differ from conventional lap-shear tests due to the initially introduced force as a simulation of the force releasing during the gradient anchoring. The key difference to conventional lap-shear specimens under sustained load lies in the fact that the constant load is not introduced from the final loading end, but from the other strip end. As a consequence to this loading scheme, Czaderski demonstrated, via short-term tests, clear differences in failure modes compared to conventional lap-shear specimens. The presence of initial stress due to the force releasing implies that existing studies on conventional lap-shear specimens, even those pertaining sustained load during environmental exposures, cannot be applied to the current situation without further investigation. In parallel to the experiments, an appropriate numerical model will be developed and calibrated though inverse formulation. In a next stage, relevant material and interface constitutive laws will be extracted for describing the observed long-term failure mechanisms, after exposure to severe environmental conditions. An important deliverable of this work will be a set of design guidelines promoting the usage of this anchorage solution amongst practitioners. An added benefit, will be the derivation of a simulation procedure which may serve as a design and structural assessment tool for actual large-scale structures, such a s retrofitted bridge girders, where actual experimentation is not so straightforward. The value of the proposed c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> work is therefore of particular caliber not only due to its academic merit, form the point of view of deciphering an emerging area which is very little explored, but additionally due to its potential for immediate absorption by the industry.