  E-Price  
This project investigates real-time pricing mechanisms for electricity networks increasingly reliant on intermittent forms of generation, in particular wind power. Pricebased distributed control techniques and ICT infrastructure are developed to ensure that electricity needs are met in real time.
Electrical power systems currently are going through some major restructuring processes, which dictate a need for novel approaches to system operation and control. It has now been widely recognized that the feasibility, the reliability and the efficiency of a future European power grid cannot be achieved by a simple extrapolation of the current state [EC2009]. The project proposes the price-based control approach as a coherent methodological framework to ensure the feasibility, the reliability and the efficiency of the future European power system, anticipate and support market based operation and decentralized decision making. It is enabled by state-of-the-art ICT technologies and by utilizing (beyond-) state-of-the-art decentralized and distributed control systems theory and modern optimization techniques. In our approach, ICT interfaces, control laws and behavioural protocols will be holistically analyzed and systematically designed as distributed solutions to time-varying global optimization problems. The central idea of the project is the employment of a new ICT infrastructure supporting timevarying price signals for: i) near-real time power and energy balancing of power system; ii) ensuring the desired level of power supply reliability by accumulation of various types of emergency and reserve capacity, for provision of ancillary services, and in general for realtime satisfaction of crucial global system constraints; iii) the coordination and the time-synchronization of actions of decentralized decision makers, so that the global system objectives from i) and ii) are necessarily achieved in such a way that the total social welfare of the system is maximized, i.e. that they are achieved in an economically optimal way; c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> iv) defining the protocols and the interfaces in the communication among producers, consumers, market and system operators.