  Quantitative mineral analysis of clays  
X-ray diffraction is the common method for qualitative and quantitative phase analysis. Clay minerals are difficult to quantify. The Rietveld-analysis will be provide an appropriate method.
The qualitative and quantitative mineral analysis are important for the characterization of the geochemical, geological and mechanical properties, e.g. of rocks, clays and soils. Several methods exist, X-ray diffraction is the most common. However, clay minerals are difficult to quantify. They commonly contain structural disorder such as semi-random or turbostratic stacking and have various composition. Other problems are associate with the platy crystallite shape and size leading to peak broadening and preffered orientation. Full-pattern-techniques as the Rietveld-method with fundamental parameter approach programs offer new possibilities for the improvement of the quantitative analysis of complex mineral mixtures with XRD. For montmorillonite the use of this method is excluded due to the lack of a proposed structure model. This lack is a direct consequence of the disordered, semi-crystalline nature of this mineral. Nevertheless, a lot is known about individual parts of the structure. To include the interlayer structure they will be simulated for Caand Na-montmorillonite for different relative humidities by the Monte Carlo simulations. Crystal coordinates for the position of the interlayer cations and the oxygens of the water molecules were extracted and implemented into the expanded structure model for calculations with the Rietveldprograms AutoQuan and BGMNWin. In combination of XRD (BRUKER AXS D8) with several methods like FT-IR and thermal analysis a procedure for sample preparation and measurement will be developed. Using Rietveld-analysis of X-ray diffractograms with the developed structure model for smectite in the 2nd Reynolds Cup the 3rd place was achieved (see www) Bergmann, J. and Kleeberg, R., 1998. Rietveld analysis of disordered layer silicates. EPDIC-V, Parma, 300-305. Ufer, K., Roth, G., Kleeberg, R., Stanjek, H., Dohrmann, R., Bergmann, J. 2004. Description of X-ray powder pattern of turbostratically disordered layer structures with a Rietveld compatible approach. Z. Kristallogr. 219, 519-527.