  Co-location of Space Geodetic Techniques on Ground and in Space 
The main objective of this project is the development of methods to make  best use of the existing and future co-locations of instruments on the ground and on-board satellites (existing and dedicated future missions) and to study the improvements in the reference frame quality to be achieved.
The quality of local ties between the different space geodetic techniques (VLBI, SLR, DORIS and GNSS) is still one of the major limiting factors for the realization of a unique global terrestrial reference frame that is accurate enough to allow the monitoring of the Earth system, i.e., of processes like sea level change, postglacial rebound and silent earthquakes. Therefore this joint project, together with Technical University of Munich and Geodetic Observatory Wettzell, part of the research group SSpace-time ¸ Reference Systems for Monitoring Global Change and for Precise Navigation in SpaceT, aims at improving the ties between the space geodetic techniques at terrestrial stations and on-board geodetic satellites. The main focus for the group at Wettzell is on time synchronization, local tie monitoring and hardware development, e.g. L-band receivers for radio telescopes. At ETH Zürich the main tasks are the combination of existing observations for a co-location in information of each satellite, the simulation of new observation types space using the Sspace ¸ tieT as observing satellites by radio telescopes (so-called G-VLBI) and the assessment of the impact of these on the realization of the terrestrial reference frame. Therefore the used Bernese GNSS software was supplemented by a set of useful subroutines to handle the different space geodetic techniques (GNSS, SLR and VLBI). This implementation process included: T ¸ an extension of the simulation program (SLR and G-VLBI), T ¸ implementation of VLBI import and processing routines (developed by R. Schmid, DGFI, Munich), T ¸ an extension for the processing of G-VLBI observations, T ¸ subroutines for the estimation of ionospheric delay corrections for single-frequency VLBI by co-located GNSS receivers. As precise orbits and satellite positions are a pre-requirement for co-location in space the precise orbit determination for Low Earth Orbiters was studied in detail for OSTM/Jason-2 and GRACE A/B, two satellite missions equipped with GPS receivers and SLR retro-reflectors. Comparing our orbit solutions to other orbit products a level of 1-2 cm for the daily RMS of the orbit difference could be achieved. Degrading effects during periods of higher solar activity could be reduced by using a box-wing model together with modeling non-gravitational effects (air drag, solar radiation pressure, Earth albedo). These models and corresponding subroutines for the Bernese GNSS software were provided by another project of the research group (U. Hugentobler, TU Munich). By applying them the RMS of the orbit differences could be decreased by 0.5 cm. Concerning the space ties satellite specific values were collected by a considerably literature research was carried out. Related to the assessment of technique specific error sources especially the estimation of range biases for SLR were studied. Improvements of the reference frame were studied by analyzing station coordinates derived by real GNSS and SLR as well as simulated G-VLBI observations. These simulations shows that 3D station coordinate RMS values of 1 cm could be achieved by G-VLBI observations of the GLONASS constellations of 15 days (observation time 2 hours each). As such very new and innovative obser- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> vations to GNSS satellites will become operable in the near future some preparations were done. One major problem of G-VLBI is the limitation of many radio telescopes to frequencies above 1.3 GHz. Therefore only L1 signals are observable and the ionospheric delay has to be corrected. By using the co-located GNSS receivers and the geometry-free linear combination differences of around 5 TECU (corresponding to 3 cm in the X-band) could be shown compared to ionospheric delays derived by quasar observations. A more detailed analysis of reference frames derived by ground-based and space-based observations together will be done as one of the next steps. For the future beyond the analysis of G-VLBI observations, simultaneous SLR observations and short baseline observations for GNSS also studies about receiver clock offsets especially for the Geodetic observatory Wettzell and common parameters in GNSS and VLBI will be worthwhile in order to assess co-location on ground and in space.