  Optimising the energy recovery and the sustainability of Swiss municipal solid waste management 
This project aims at supporting the prioritisation of recycling and treat-  ment strategies for municipal solid waste with respect to energy efficiency, resource quality and efficiency, carbon footprint and overall environmental impact by a multi-objective environmental optimisation.
The 700 kg of municipal solid waste (MSW) generated per capita and year in Switzerland hold a substantial potential for recovery of energy and materials. The energy potential is, however, underused at the moment: only 56S000 TJ of the total net calorific value of 124S000 TJ contained in MSW incinerated annually in Switzerland are recovered as electricity and heat. In addition to energy recovery, material recovery from MSW or from incineration residues means avoiding energy use for the production of primary materials and therefore lowering the energy and resource demand in the manufacturing industry. Waste is also used as fuel in industrial processes such as the production of cement and in the chemical and pharmaceutical industry. The overarching goal of the subproject (SP1) is to support the prioritisation of recycling and treatment strategies for MSW with respect to energy efficiency, resource quality and efficiency, carbon footprint and overall environmental impact by a multi-objective environmental optimisation. To this end, we will first conduct an energy and material flow analysis (EAF and MFA) of the current MSW management system. In addition, detailed case studies on selected waste streams of large relevance, e.g. on plastic wastes, will be carried out. Using an optimisation procedure which builds on the MFA, the results of the case studies, and a life cycle assessment (LCA), we will identify energetically and environmentally optimal solutions for Swiss MSW and resource management. This holistic assessment will enable the consideration of technical and capacity-related constraints while optimising the overall MSW management system. Furthermore, the environmental assessment, supplemented with the economic assessment and the study on the transitions to optimised MSW management systems (projects take place within one umbrella project from SNF), provides a novel insight into the overall sustainability of Swiss MSW management. The results will be translated into strategies, which will support upcoming planning processes regarding MSW management and sustainable future energy supply in Switzerland. In this sense, the proposed subproject is an important and innovative contribution to the joint project SSustainable ¸ waste and resource management to support energy turnaround (wastEturn)T and it will help to accomplish the Energy Strategy 2050 by making more efficient use of waste materials.