  Multi-objective Evolutionary Computing  
Many real-world problems involve simultaneous optimization of several incommensurable and often competing objectives. The goal of our research is to achieve a better theoretical understanding of existing approaches and to design new and effective optimization algorithms. 
Many real-world problems involve simultaneous optimization of several incommensurable and often competing objectives. Typically, there is a trade-off of cost versus quality, where quality itself is defined in terms of further sub-criteria like performance, power dissipation, size, extensibility, etc. in the case of, e.g, embedded hardware/software system. Other examples for this sort of optimization problem are manufacturing design problems (e.g., personal computers) in general and several practically relevant NP-hard problems like scheduling, timetabling, partitioning and its numerous variants in particular which actually involve multiple objectives. There is usually no single optimal solution for any of these applications, but rather a set of alternative solutions. These solutions are optimal in the wider sense that no other solutions in the search space are superior to them when all objectives are considered. They are known as Pareto-optimal solutions. The goal of our research is: to achieve a better understanding of existing approaches to multiobjective optimization by performing an extensive comparison on several test problems; to extend the theory of multi-objective optimization in the following areas: run-time analysis, convergence proofs, comparison of different search methods, performance indicators. to improve existing and to develop new, alternative multicriteria methods; to apply multiobjective optimization techniques to the computer aided design of complex, heterogeneous hardware/software systems; and to provide a comprehensive programming framework on the basis of which new applications involving multiple, conflicting objectives can be implemented with minimal effort.