  Complex non-collinear magnets  
Complex, especially incommensurate and chiral magnetic structures are often a result of competing ground states. Neutron scattering is used as tool to identify such phases  and to study the multitude of phase transitions that they exhibit.
Certain magnetically ordered materials are characterized by a non-collinear arrangement of the spins of individual magnetic ions. Of particular interest are helimagnets and other incommensurate and/or chiral structures. Historically, much research was done on rare earth metals and simple geometrically frustrated systems. However, recent years were marked by an energetic revival in the field. The new understanding is that in many con-collinear magnets the ground state is a competition between multiple energetically close spin configurations. The competition makes "weak" quantum-mechanical and fluctuation effects relevant. In turn, this gives rise to exotic thermodynamic and quantum phase transitions, such as seen in triangular-lattice systems [1]. In the same context, a fundamentally new class of magnetic ordering, one characterized by non-zero topological numbers, has been recently discovered [2]. Finally, qualitatively new physics, such as multiferroic behavior, was found to emerge from "weak" interactions between non-collinear magnetism and the crystal lattice [3]. The purpose of the project is to use neutron diffraction and complementary techniques to study magnetic structures and phase transitions in complex non-collinear magnets. In particular, we closely examine the field-dependent properties of the insulator Ba2CuGe2O7, a previously much-studied Dzyaloshinki-Moriya helimagnet. This system can be described as a soliton lattice, and undergoes a unique incommensurate-to-commensurate phase transition [4]. Presently we are seeking to understanding a mysterious "intermediate" phase, which separates the soliton lattice phase from the commensurate state. Preliminary results suggest that it too is a non-collinear and incommensurate structure, but is very unlike the soliton lattice phase, in all other structural and thermodynamic aspects. Another research thrust is directed at understanding the ground states and quantum phase transitions in frustrated low-dimensional quantum magnets. An example is the spin ladder system Sul-Cu2Cl4. This material shows a totally unique quantum critical point between a disordered spin liquid state and an ordered helimagnetic phase [5]. The quastions that we now as are: "Is the ordered phase a ferroelectric?", "Does chirality, inherent to the helimagnet but absent in the spin liquid, appear simultaneously with long-range order or independently of it?", "How is this quantum phase transition affected by deliberately introduced structural disorder?" Yet another example of ongoing research has to do with frustrated dipolar magnets, such as the hexagonal lattice system ErI3 [6]. Due to the complex crystal field structure of Er3+, at temperatures in the mK range, this material undergoes a series of phase transitions in an external magnetic field. Understanding these novel phases are a formidable challenge. N. A. Furtune et al., Phys. Rev. Lett 102, 257201 (2009) S. Mühlbauer et al. Science, 323:5916, (2009). M. Kenzelmann et al., Phys. Rev. lett. 95, 087206 (2005). c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> A. Zheludev et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 4857 (1997) V. O. Garlea et al., Phys. Rev. B 79, 060404 (2009). K. W. Kramer et al., Phys. Rev. B 60, R3724 (1999).