  History of Architectural Theory: The Drawing as an Instrument of the Architectural Design  
Die Zeichnung als Hilfsmittel von Planung und Erstellung von Architektur ist seit der Antike verbürgt. Die geometrische Figur samt mathemat. Verlässlichkeit ist dabei Grundlage der Architekturzeichnung. Das Projekt analysiert die ,,graphidis scientia" als Modell einer "Architektur als Wissenschaft". 
The history of the theory of architecture with a systematic approach: the architectural drawing. Architectural drawing has been established as an instument for planning and erecting buildings since antiquity. Whether this was carried out by engraving lines on existing elements (Didyma) or by drawing plans on parchment as it was done in the late Gothic period is less relevant than the fact that the drawings have always been based on geometric figures with their mathematical reliability. With the humanistic aim to work up the sources (Vitruv) a new option arose: the claim that architecture is science ("architectura est scientia"/Vitruv, I,I,1). The architectural drawing ("graphidis scientia") has been a subject of consideration right from the beginning, since its conception has already been connected to the Vitruvian concept of science (ratiocinatio for theory as analogy to 'more geometrico') After all, the desired reconstruction of the 'lost' drawings of the Vitruvian treatise does not allow any other choice than that of geometric figures. This is also in accordance with Alberti's definition of 'lineamenta' or the later explicitly defined distinction between drawing (for the painter) and architectural drawing (grammik instead of/and grafik). Thus, in the period between L.B. Alberti and D. Barbaro the discussion on architectural drawing and the science of architecture took a convergent course in several respects. The more the efforts for an interpretation were directed to demonstrate "scientific coherence", the more "obscure" Vitruv's text was mistreated and manipulated. The aim of our research based on preparatory work which has been carried out since 1980 is to reconstruct this model of 'architecture as science', to clarify its conditions und thus to compare and assess the achieved theoretic positions. The fact that, until the Modern Movement, corresponding conceptions were having a more constant effect than perhaps the formal, phenotypic features of architecture, is playing a vital role. Le Corbusier's 'architecture pure crZ<caron>ation de l'esprit' is as much in this tradition as his definition of geometry as 'le seul langage que nous sachions parler'. By analyzing a historically limited problem, a general principle shall be expressed with the possibility to theorize architecture within its closest field: the design.