  Plant-mediated interactions among beneficial and pathogenic microbes: implications for disease transmission and ecology  
This project will determine reciprocal fitness consequences for beneficial root bacteria and a pathogenic virus interacting via a shared host plant (Medicago truncatula) and  elucidate mechanisms by which microbes alter plant chemical phenotype, vector behavior and interactions with natural enemies.
Recent research suggests that plant viruses and other pathogens frequently alter host traits in ways that facilitate transmission by insect vectors, often via effects on biochemical traits that influence host-plant quality for or attractiveness to vectors. Such pathogen-induced changes in host phenotypes can also have broader implications for community ecology. Yet, we currently have a limited understanding of the mechanisms underlying such effects. This project therefore aims to better elucidate the biochemical mediation of plant-virus-vector interactions within the context of complex ecological communities where plants simultaneously engage in mutualistic and antagonistic interactions with a diverse array of other organisms, including ubiquitous, non-pathogenic/beneficial microbes that colonize plant roots. To accomplish this goal, this project employs the model leguminous plant Medicago truncatula and its associated insect and microbial communities (rootnodulating rhizobia, plant-growth promoting rhizobacteria, and the generalist virus, Alfalfa mosaic virus). Medicago truncatula has served as an important model for studying the legume-rhizobia symbiosis at the genetic level, but is not as well studied in its interactions with other beneficial rhizobacteria or with viruses. This project builds on existing knowledge of M. truncatula biology to reveal new information about a multitude of biotic interactions that regulate natural communities. First, we will learn how bacteria modify virus fitness through impacts on in-plant replication and circulation as well as the host phenotype presented to foraging vectors and their natural enemies. This line of work will also reveal how virus infection impacts rhizobacterial fitness. Second, through a combined metabolomic-transcriptomic analysis, we will significantly enhance our understanding of how different types of beneficial rhizobacteria interact to influence plant resistance and how a ubiquitous, economically relevant plant virus is able to modify plant chemistry and vector behavior. This approach has the added benefit of revealing new putative functions for M. truncatula genes and contributing to efforts to develop this plant as a model organism. Results will serve as the basis for follow-up studies exploring the evolution of plant viruses and bacteria as a result of plant-mediated interactions and modeling the epidemiological consequences of these interactions for virus spread in natural and agricultural systems.