  DOW; Advanced Epoxy Resins for Structural Liquid Composite Molding Applications (AERoSLiM)  
Epoxies are brittle by nature and require toughening for use in structural applications. A wide range of toughening techniques exists, some more effective than others. The choice of suitable toughening techniques can be constrained by operational requirements of the  epoxy and implementation.
Epoxies are brittle by nature and require toughening for use in structural applications. A wide range of toughening techniques exists, some more effective than others. The choice of suitable toughening techniques can be constrained by operational requirements of the epoxy; such as glass transition temperature (Tg). However, the composite implementation processability (resin infusion into fiber reinforcement), of these tougheners differs greatly. The toughening efficiency of particle tougheners is dependent on a uniform distribution in the composite (reinforcement fiber infused with resin). In LCM processing, considerations include: the bulk resin flow, and toughener distribution within the composite due to fiber filtering during the infusion process. Despite its fundamental importance, the flow of particle toughened systems presents a challenge which is poorly understood. Key processing parameters affecting resin flow include: resin viscosity/rheology, injection pressure (fluid velocity), particle size/shape (& agglomerate size), and preform porosity. Therefore, a key aim of the research is understanding particle resin flow in LCM processes. To do so, the main research aspects in this project that are to be studied are: T ¸ Characterizing and identifying the influence of particle tougheners on resin flow during infusion processes (particle movement, particle sedimentation, and influence on bulk resin flow) T ¸ Modeling of particle filled resin flow (resin flow resulting from particle/fiber filtering and other material properties) T ¸ Identifying process constraints (sensitivity of resin to fiber material parameters and processing conditions) The research aim is to help in development of more effective toughened epoxy systems by defining limits of particle addition based on a better understanding of particle filled resin flow.