  History of Architectural Theory, Architectural Theory in Germany 
On the basis of the SCensus ¸ of Writings on the Theory of Architecture,T  the project will carry out a scholarly assessment (in many cases for the first time) of writings on the theory of architecture in the German-speaking cultural area from 1500 to 1618/48.
The aim of the research project is the first systematic presentation and scholarly as nsessment of the architecture theoretical texts written in the German cultural context in the period between the 15th and 19th centuries. The publication of this material may be equated with the production of a standard reference work in the area of German architectural theory, a work which will satisfy an obvious research need. The fact that this specific research has not yet been fulfilled may be explained by the specific me´ ´ which traditional ´ preference thods of the discipline of CHistory of ArtS, nly has been led by itSs for an Italianate-Humanistic conception of art and the theory of art. It is therefore symptomatic that Julius von Schlosser's Kunstliteratur (Vienna, 1924), reprinted continuously since its original publication, still maintains the status of a standard reference work and a determinate of methodology. It reflects the above mentioned "Italian prejudice." Influenced by this "Italian prejudice,S ¸ the view of architecture as an "art" led the distancing of architecture to a large ex ntent from the engineering sciences, mathematics, fortifications, hydraulic engineering, etc. This separation was established quite early and per nsists in much contemporary research. It has thus led to the isolation of "architecture" as subject. A quality specific to the relevant German architectural literature well into the 18th century (for example, C.L. Sturm) is, on the contrary, its conviction architecture and engineering (and of mar ntial architecture) is indivisible. This is a position of particular significance for current issues relevant to the discipline of architecture and the definition of its boundaries. Of equal importance here is the fact that an all-encompassing form of systematic, scientific thought is much more binding within the discipline of architecture in German-speaking cultural circles. This kind of thought has, however, often been overlooked or at the very least neglected. In Italy, and particularly within the French discussion related to the Academie Royale d'Archi ntec nture, which was founded in 1671, the study of the columnar orders assumed the central position within theo nretical discourse. In German cultural circles, although the "Book of Orders" or "Säulenbuch" assumed considerable importance, the predominant conviction, even until the time of Christian Wolff (Elementa Matheseos universae, Halle, 1715/17), was that architecture belonged in the broadest sense to the mathematical (sometimes modified to read the mechanical) disciplines and was dealt with in correspondingly general terms. The presentation and con ncep ntion of architectural theory in the German-speaking world thus sought to reveal continuity in the scientific under nstanding of architecture. This is in fact the thread which runs through the efforts of most theoreticians from Ryff through Sturm. The present research project takes account of this tradition. Its basis is the systematic compilation of architectural theory, which was prepared by the same group of researchers since 1990. In addition to the books in the libraries in the Zurich area which are included in this survey, titles from other signifi ncant German-language libraries will be incorporated into the resrearch programm. This research will make possible a comprehensive overview of the relevant primary literature. A group of researchers with exten nsive knowledge in this area of study, and of the relevant library collections, will be involved. It is planned to invite additional specialists for specific contributions in relevant domains, such as philological studies etc. The publication of this project is planned in c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> two volumes.