  Population genomics of adaptation in the wheat pathogen Mycosphaerella graminicola  
Modern agriculture relies on effective crop protection to ensure food security. Crop pathogens pose a significant challenge as they can rapidly adapt to new resistant crop  varieties and fungicides. Our project will illuminate key characteristics of the rapidly evolving genome of a major pathogen.
Significance of research: Modern agriculture relies on effective crop protection to ensure food security. Crop pathogens pose a significant challenge as they can rapidly adapt to new resistant crop varieties and fungicides. The model fungus Mycosphaerella graminicola is one of the most damaging pathogens on wheat in Europe. Our project will focus on fundamental characteristics of rapid evolution in pathogens and will provide an evolutionary genomics context to an SNSF-funded project identifying the genetic basis of pathogenicity, fungicide resistance and climate adaptation. Key objectives: Our project will illuminate key characteristics of the rapidly evolving genome of a major crop pathogen. Our first objective is to establish a highly refined map of the ongoing evolutionary changes in the genome from multiple populations of the species (i.e. population genomics). We will be able to identify the fastest-evolving regions of the genome. These regions are likely linked to recent adaptations of the pathogen to resistant wheat varieties or fungicides. Our second objective will utilize the strengths of M. graminicola as a model to understand the evolution of chromosomal and gene structure. The generated sequence data will allow us to study fundamental mechanisms of genome evolution. Our third objective will complement a SNSF-funded project identifying the genetic basis of important traits. A key component in the understanding of pathogenicity and resistance traits is knowledge of their frequency and global distribution. This population genomic project will allow us to extend the results of the SNSF project based on a Swiss population to a global scale. Methods: We will draw on several strengths of the model fungal pathogen M. graminicola. A reference isolate is fully sequenced, including excellent knowledge on gene functions. The small genome is very amenable to re-sequencing with next generation sequencing technology. Based on our extensive knowledge of the global diversity of M. graminicola, we selected a representative set of populations to analyse variation in genomes of 120 fungal isolates. We will use sophisticated genomic analyses to identify critical genome regions underlying rapid pathogen evolution.