  Advance drainage in tunnelling 
Water has an adverse effect on the ground response to tunneling. Drainage improves ground behavior. The research project investigates the interrelationships between drainage measures and stability or deformation problems. 
Water has a negative effect on the stability and deformation of underground structures. The statically unfavourable influence of water is due (i), to pore water pressure (which reduces effective stresses and thus shearing resistance) and (ii), to the seepage force associated with groundwater flow towards the cavity. High water pressure and/or large pressure gradients endanger the stability of the working face and of the excavated profile and may also favour the development of large deformations or high ground pressure. By draining the rock, pore water pressure will be reduced at a safe distance from the tunnel face, thus eliminating seepage forces in the vicinity of the cavity. At the same time, effective stress and thus shearing resistance are increased through the reduction in pore water pressure ('consolidation'), and this is favourable in terms of the deformations occurring during and after tunnelling. In a first part of the project, the static effects of drainage are examined for a number of typical tunnelling hazards (e.g. the stability of the working face or convergences in the profile). These examinations will be based on the simplifying assumption of complete drainage and will not take account of questions relating to feasibility and/or execution (e.g. 'how to drain?'). In a second part, two factors will be investigated which limit the feasibility and the effectiveness of drainage measures. These factors are: (i) the quantity of water which has to be discharged in rock of high permeability (or, for a given drainage system capacity, the magnitude of the residual water pressure); (ii) the time required for the water pressures to decrease around the drainage elements in a low permeability ground (or, for a given drainage time, again, the amount of the residual water pressure). A third group of questions concerns real world drainage situations (e.g. draining a pilot gallery, or drainage measures through the working face or from adjacent underground structures). Different drainage layouts will be modelled in detail in order to investigate technically feasible reductions in pore water pressure as a function of the relevant parameters of each drainage layout (e.g. the length and spacing of drillholes or the distance from adjacent draining tunnels) with special focus on the practically unavoidable restrictions on drainage systems (either because the time available is too short or because the spacing and the action radius of the drainage elements is small).