  Fire behaviour of concrete-filled tubular columns with steel core 
The research project aims at analyzing the load-carrying behavior of  concrete-filled steel tubular columns with steel core subjected to fire.
Fire design is an important factor in the safe and economical design of steel and steel-concrete composite structures. Fires in buildings may have enormous consequences on life safety and economies. It is necessary to get a fundamental knowledge of the structural behavior of steel-concrete composite members in fire and develop safe, economical and easy applicable calculation models, especially in case of buckling. Concrete-filled steel tubular columns with steel cores have an attractive architectural appearance due to the visible steel of the tube and the high slenderness of the column. Concrete-filled steel tube sections with steel cores are used for highly loaded columns and/or for minimizing the size of the column. Under fire conditions the steel tube is directly exposed to the fire and heats up quickly. The concrete inside the tube decelerates the heating of the steel core. The reduced strength and stiffness of steel and concrete at elevated temperatures must be considered for calculating both the cross-sectional resistance and slender column strength of steel-concrete composite sections. The research project aims at analyzing the load-carrying behavior of concrete-filled steel tubular columns with steel core subjected to fire. The intention is to develop a analytical model for this kind of steel-concrete composite sections subjected to axial compression and fire. This model will allow taking into account flexural buckling, residual stresses, temperature-dependent material properties for steel and concrete, thermal strains and stresses as well as standard ISO and natural fire exposures. After this, the project aims at improving the cross-sections used for the composite columns. Procedure - To analyze existing fire tests on slender columns with concrete-filled steel tubes with steel core. - To extend the knowledge about the fire behavior of steel-concrete composite columns by performing a comprehensive numerical parametric study using the finite element approach. - To develop a safe, economic and easily applicable calculation model for the temperature-dependent cross-sectional resistance and the slender column strength.