  Strain effects in epitaxial spinel thin films  
We explore how epitaxial strain affects the structural, electronic, and magnetic properties of spinel ferrites and chromites (e.g. CoFe2O4, NiFe2O4, CoCr2O4), to assess the potential of these materials for future applications in spintronics and magneto-electric devices. 
Spinel ferrites are rare examples of insulating magnetic materials with high Curie temperatures and large saturation magnetization. In addition CoFe2O4 is highly magnetostrictive, i.e. it exhibits a strong coupling between magnetization and lattice strain. Spinel ferrites are therefore very attractive for a number of applications such as spin-filtering tunnel barriers or magneto-electric devices. All these applications require integration of the corresponding material in a thin film device. It is well known from other materials that the substrate induced strain in such thin film devices can significantly alter the properties of the thin film materials compared to the corresponding bulk system. Similarly, spinel chromites such as CoCr2O4 and MnCr2O4 are insulating ferrimagnetic materials, but due to competing interactions leading to partial magnetic frustration, these materials exhibit magnetic order only at low temperatures. However, due to the magnetic frustration these materials exhibit complex spiral magnetic ordering that break inversion symmetry and lead to so-called multiferroic properties, i.e. they exhibit simultaneous appearance of magnetization and ferroelectric polarization. Here we use first principles electronic structure calculations to explore the structural, electronic, and magnetic properties of spinel ferrite and chromite thin films. Of particular focus are the magnetostrictive properties, which can be used to achieve coupling between magnetic and electric fields in so-called multiferroic heterostructures, and the tunnelling properties of magnetically polarized ferrites, which can be used to create and detect spin-polarized currents in spintronics devices. This project is a collaboration with the group of Beatriz Noheda at the U. Groningen in the Netherlands