  Embedded Optimization for Resource Constrained Platforms (EMBOCON)  
EMBOCON will study the potential of embedded optimization in a wide range of engineering applications. The project will focus on the theoretical and practical challenges of real-time optimization in high-speed areas where computational power is severely limited.
There is enormous economic potential for the application of embedded optimization technologies in embedded systems design. Recent advances in the performance of embedded hardware platforms, in combination with fundamental improvements in optimization theory and algorithms, have opened the door to widespread applications over the next decade. Embedded optimization will enable huge energy and resource savings, increased safety, and improved fault detection across a wide a range of industrial applications in the mechatronic, automotive, process control and aerospace sectors. In order to realize the full potential of optimization in embedded systems, their design must also be supported by a focussed set of tools enabling the rapid transfer of novel highperformance algorithms to practical applications. The EMBOCON consortium will enable widespread application of real-time optimization in embedded systems through: T ¸ Tailoring of customized numerical algorithms to increase their robustness and efficiency on embedded systems T ¸ Enabling real-time optimization on cheap industry-standard hardware platforms T ¸ Defining a common user interface for optimization technologies to facilitate technology transfer to industry, and T ¸ Performing challenging case studies in cooperation with industrial partners to demonstrate technological maturity. The EMBOCON consortium will strengthen a network of world-leading academic and industrial partners with complementary expertise in control, optimization and embedded systems in a range of industrial applications. Particular emphasis is placed on close collaboration between ma- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> thematical algorithm developers, control theorists, hardware specialists and industrial application engineers. The network will consolidate and extend EuropeSs position as the world research leader in these areas and foster strong collaborative links between European academia and industry.