  Synergies between fragmentation and habitat patch degradation: Implications for species and population viability  
In this study we combine molecular and ecological approaches to investigate how habitat fragmentation and habitat patch quality may affect plant reproductive processes of two rare tree species (Dysoxylum malabaricum and Vateria indica) endemic to the Western Ghats, India.
Loss of continuous tropical forest is known to impact native plant reproduction and population viability. Additionally to the physical effects of fragmentation intensified human disturbance leads to further degradation of patches and their surrounding matrix. These threats are expected to go beyond the physical effects of fragmentation. Additional threats that commonly co-occur with forest fragmentation are proliferation of invasive species, change in forest patch species composition and consequently the disruption of mutualisms. Plant pollinator and seed disperser mutualism may be especially sensitive to patch quality, thus increasing the effects of spatial isolation in such patches. This study aims to investigate the synergies between habitat fragmentation and habitat patch quality in two rare tree species, Dysoxylum malabaricum (Meliaceae), Vateria indica (Dipterocarpaceae) endemic to the Western Ghats, in South India. The research area is situated in a heavily fragmented agro-forest landscape containing a high den´ sity of small Ssacred groveS forests within a matrix of shade coffee plantations with native tree cover. The native tree cover in this system is being replaced with fast growing exotics, which additionally will affect genetic connectivity along the landscape. Using microsatellite markers and parentage analysis we will assess contemporary gene flow by pollen and seed dispersal, and historic gene flow, based on genetic differentiation in adult populations. Together with field observations on patch quality, flowering intensity, seed set and nursery experiments we will evaluate the genetic consequences of fragmentation and patch quality. Preliminary results are expected by spring 2010.