  Thermal hydraulics of solar thermal plants  
The thermal hydraulics of low temperature solar thermal plants are investigated by computer simulations as well as experimental means. The main focus is placed on two phase flow operations during stagnation and/or in the presence of non condensable gases.
The project aims at the optimization of solar thermal systems, which are of considerable relevance for the sustainable growth of the renewable energy sector. Based on a deep thermal fluid dynamics understanding of the operation, innovative solutions with regard to three aspects of the reliable and economic operation of solar thermal systems are being explored: 1. Based on a modeling of the transport of non-condensable gases, both dissolved in the liquid phase and transported mixed with vapor, methods for their automatic removal are developed. A particular issue of interest is the different behavior in pure aqueous systems and mixtures of water with propylene glycol. The goal consists in proposing design features that are capable in avoiding the blockage of the circulation by free gases using passive techniques, i.e. design elements that function independently from human interference and energy supply. Emphasis is given to low-cost solutions. 2. Several perturbations, such as pump trips to avoid overheating of the storage tank or by pump failure, may lead to a so-called stagnation of the solar plant caused by evaporation of the heat carrier. The goal is to avoid damage to the plant and the necessity of costly service measures to bring the plant back into operation. This goal is pursued by thermal hydraulic simulations and the evaluation of the obtained results with regard to the identification of optimization potential. 3. The modeling activities aim at creating tools necessary for engineering work to enhance the efficiency and to reduce costs of solar thermal plants. The work is combined theoretical and experimental. Thermal hydraulic system codes available in the field of nuclear safety, combined with in-house developed simulation tools are used for the theoretical modeling. The models are validated against experiments performed at a test rig comprising of a single panel element of 2.3 m2 area, irradiated by an artificial sun consisting of 4 halogen lamps. The model is furthermore used to test degassing devices that are proposed as a result of the c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> theoretical work.