  Seasonal Response in an active debris flow catchment  
This research project focuses on the coupling of meteorological and hydrological perturbations leading to triggering of slope instabilities, causing surficial landslides on hill slopes and sediment production in active Alpine catchments in the Meretschibach (Canton Wallis, CH).
The Bochtür slope is the main source area of debris flows in the Meretschibach catchment (above Agarn village, Canton Wallis). In the past, debris flows have caused damage in the residential areas of Briannen and Agarn, and so several protection measures such dams and retention basins were constructed. However, rockfall, landslides, and debris flows are frequently observed in the catchment and on the open slopes. Additionally, recent unpublished InSAR-data provided by the Federal Office of Environment (FOEN, Dr. Hugo Raetzo) have shown that some parts of the catchment are moving downslope at roughly 50cm/a, causing renewed interest in the catchment from both scientific and applied perspectives. These observations, and the need for additional tools for prediction and hazard analysis, led to the main goal of the research being defined as the development of a thorough understanding of the generation, mechanical production, storage and remobilisation of rock debris and sediment triggered by meteorological and hydrological processes in scree slopes and debris flow catchments. Debris flow and landslide events in an alpine environment depend on factors such slope inclination, soil and rock mass characterization, vegetation, ice degradation and snowmelt, and rainfall infiltration. These factors are being studied by an interdisciplinary research team working on field monitoring, laboratory testing, physical and numerical modelling. The initial phase of the project will be dominated by the field monitoring. Bedrock, slope and channel instabilities will be identified and characterised by the WSL using ground-based radar interferometry (GPRI) remote sensing methods in collaboration with Dr. Andrew Kos, guest researcher at IGT and Terrasense. Selected spots on the slopes (landslide source areas) will be monitored in situ by ETH to measure water infiltration-suction characteristics in the ground to provide time-series data about infiltration quantity and rate, and their effect on the insitu effective stress. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> A geophysics Master project (Kerstin Fankhauser) will be carried out under the supervision of Prof Hansruedi Maurer to characterise the subsurface using ground-based Electrical Resistivity Tomography (ERT) and airborne Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR). It is intended to identify the depth to bedrock, its topography and fractures, the overlying soil profile and seasonal changes in the subsurface water content. Once the source area is characterised (initial state + pre-disposition (WSL) and soil material properties (ETH)), a rainfall analysis will be done by the WSL to define a frequency-magnitude distribution. The physical/numerical modelling of the infiltration and analysis of landslide movement will be done by the Institute of Geotechnical Engineering at ETH. These results will be used along with historical information to define the input scenarios for the runout modelling and hazard analysis. Two doctoral students will work in collaboration on the specific tasks, in a team formed by ETH and WSL and supported by the TRAMM 2 partners. The first student will work on the geotechnical aspects of the project such as the soil characterization, monitoring, physical and numerical modelling, and the second student on the temporal behaviour and spatial distribution of slope instabilities at Meretschibach, using a combination of new ground-based remote sensing methods, traditional field methods and synthesis to determine frequency-magnitude relations of all mass movements in the study area.