  Picosecond ultrasound  
Ultrahigh frequency acoustic pulses excited by short laser pulses are used for the characterization of microstructures, MEMS devices, and thin films geometrically and mechanically in a rapid, non-contact, and non-destructive manner with high lateral resolution. 
Optical techniques like the pump-probe method for monitoring picosecond ultrasound excited in thin films or micro-structures with ultrashort laser pulses are useful for accurate and nondestructive evaluation as well as characterization of material properties. The pump-probe laserbased acoustic methods generate acoustic bulk waves in a thermo-elastic way by absorbing the pump laser pulses at the surface of the thin film. The acoustic waves are partly reflected at any discontinuity of the acoustic impedance like interface of thin films or the surface of MEMS structures. Back at the surface of the specimen the reflected acoustic wave causes a change of the optical reflectivity, which is measured with the probe laser pulse. With the measurement of the bulk acoustic wave propagation versus time the material properties or geometrical dimensions are determined. The accuracy for the determination of the thickness of thin films for example is very high and of about some nanometers. In addition one- and two dimensional thermo-elastic models are developed to investigate the laserbased excitation and propagation of the longitudinal acoustic pulses in thin film stacks and MEMS devices, like membranes or cantilevers. The analytical and above all the numerical models are very powerful for the calculation of the induced temperature and the detailed shape of the excited acoustic pulses especially if heat diffusion effects are to be considered. For example in copper thin widely used in the chip industry - the heat diffusion during excitation affects the shape of films U the acoustic pulse. The numerical simulation and accurate measurement of high frequency acoustic wave propagation in microstructures, like AFM tips or functionally graded materials (FGM) which leads to potential new applications is also part of our activity.