  Sustainable Rural Dwelling Unit (SRDU)  
The research contributes to the improvement of rural housing in Ethiopia. It draws lessons from vernacular architectures in rural areas and developes an appropriate construction methodology as well as material appliance. The focus is on building full scale prototypologies in rural Etrhiopia.
It is a glaring fact that the Ethiopian rural population, about 80% of the estimated eighty million people, is largely living in housing units that are not only substandard but also incompatible to the current transformative political, economic and social forces. The issue of rural housing is largely neglected, even by the Millennium Development Goals charted by the United Nations Habitat program. This dire situation calls for an immediate intervention for systematic improvement. This research aims to contribute towards the improvement of the rural housing in Ethiopia. It seeks to draw lessons from the vernacular architecture of a rural area and incorporate it into a Sustainable Rural Dwelling Unit (SRDU). The focus of the research is on a one-to-one construction of a housing proto-typology that would primarily embody the positive elements of vernacular architecture within the framework of sustainability. The vision is to develop a rural settlement having the proto-typology as its basic unit. The project has three phases. Phase- 1 deals with the documentation and study of the existing rural housing (vernacular architecture) and local building materials, Phase-2 deals with the construction of a single proto-typology (SRDU) including the use of renewable energy and Phase-3 will focus on the replication of the SRDU into a cluster of several units. The research area is in Gubrie, Guraghe Zone located 175 kms from Addis Ababa; the capital of Ethiopia, The footprint size of the proto-typology is about 65m2 and will include renewable energy, such as: solar energy and bio-gas. Developing renewable energy for one housing unit is very expensive. Therefore, the renewable energy will be developed for four dwelling units. Innovation and transferability Innovative design that is informed by the vernacular architecture of the area and incorporating needs for healthy habitation. A cross cultural transfer of knowledge and skill is believed to be achieved between students and local artisans during construction. Furthermore, transformation of the traditional way of building into the new one is also thought to help for an adaptive transformation of lifestyle towards the unbeatable urbanization. Ethical standards and social equity An exemplary partnership between local administrators, an academic institution and the local people is secured. Respect for the cultural identity of the people is reflected through the incorporation of symbolic cultural elements, spatial accommodation, and through participation of the local elders.(20 local trainees , 5 roof makers and 3 semi skilled and professionals from the university are expected to participate) Environmental quality and resource efficiency c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> The dominant building materials and energy source being renewable makes the architecture to blend on its site with less interference with the environment Earth and bamboo are the dominant building materials, 67% of bamboo in Africa is found in Ethiopia. Economic performance and compatibility A transformable and an adaptable typology for different income groups gives the possibility of self-building using locally available materials. Job creation possibilities and an improved income source for artisans is one of the goals of the project. The oil plant which is used as a fence in combination with the bio-gas and solar cell reduces the cost of energy consumption Contextual and aesthetic impact Keeping the identity of the spatial usage, material of construction and its being constructed by the craftsmanship of the local people, the architecture is believed to blend in its naturally green setting. Used materials Abundantly available materials like earth, bamboo, and straw are used as dominant materials. The wall is rammed earth with a straw mix resting on a stone gravel foundation; the roof is a bamboo leaf ("honche") applied on basket like bamboo framework. The mezzanine floor is constructed using a light weight earth fill graded on a soil block vault. The Arthur Waser Foundation, based in Lucerene Switzerland, sponsored this research project called SRDU (Sustainable Rural Dwelling Unit) in Ethiopia to the tune of 100,000 Swiss Francs as a so-called pilot for a larger research project to come. The project builds on an academic research cooperation between the Ethiopian Institute of Architecture, Building Construction and City Development (EiABC) in Ethiopia and the Professorship of Dirk E. Hebel of Architecture and Construction at the Singapore-ETH Centre for Global Environmental Sustainability and the Future Cities Laboratory (FCL) in Singapore.