  Electronic and Thermal Properties of Quasicrystals at Low Temperatures  

 Quasicrystals belong to a particular type of solids which is neither periodically ordered, like ordinary crystals, nor disordered or amorphous, as glasses. This novel form of matter has a well-defined, discrete point group symmetry, like crystals, but one which is explicitly incompatible with periodic translational order. Instead, quasicrystals possess a quasiperiodic long-range order. In view of the exotic structural properties of perfect quasicrystals, the nature of electronic and thermal transport in these materials is expected to be qualitatively different from that in crystalline (periodic) and simply disordered materials. Data of electronic and thermal properties obtained at low temperatures are of particular interest because they are usually indicative of ground-state properties and therefore help to facilitate comparisons with theoretical models. Our most recent work in the area of low-temperature properties of quasicrystals is related to thermal properties of decagonal Al-Cu-Co. Dodecagonal quasicrystals are of particular interest because they share stuctural properties of solids with periodic and quasiperiodic type of long-range order - they are periodic along the 10-fold symmetry axis and quasiperiodic in the plane perpendicular to it. We have measured the specific heat and the thermal conductivities along the periodic direction and along a direction in the quasiperiodic plane, respectively, of high-quality single grains of decagonal Al-Cu-Co at low temperatures. The linear-in-T contribution of 0.51 T mJ/mole K to the low-temperature specific heat of decagonal Al-Cu-Co still indicates a low density of electronic states at the Fermi energy, although its value is larger than those established for icosahedral quasicrystals. The cubic-in-T term to the specific heat is compatible with a Debye temperature 596 K, which is considerably higher than the values previously reported for stable icosahedral quasicrystals. The dominant feature in the temperature dependence of the lattice thermal conductivity along the periodic direction is a distinct maximum of about 25 K. This feature may be attributed to a crossover between the Peierls regime of the usual Umklapp phonon scattering and the regime of phonon-electron scattering. On the other hand, the lattice thermal conductivity in the quasiperiodic plane is only weakly temperature-dependent between 30 and 70 K, in agreement with the concept of generalized Umklapp processes in quasiperiodic crystals. This direct comparison strongly supports the view that the characteristics of lattice dynamics in periodically or quasiperiodically structured condensed matter are distinctly different.