  Aggregation stability of amyloidogenic proteins and peptides 
The mechanism and the kinetics of protein and peptide aggregation invol-  ved both in biological systems and in biotechnology industry is investigated from a biophysical point of view. An approach based on experimental characterization and model activity is considered.
Many proteins and peptides are able to self-assemble into insoluble fibrillar structures. This process is involved in several relevant research fields, including biomedicine, biology, chemical-physics, pharmaceutics, food industry and nanotechnology. In this project, two main areas of research are considered: a) Proteins aggregation in human disorders: Many neurodegenerative human diseases are connected to the aberrant behavior of soluble proteins and their aggregation into regular fibrils known as amyloids. In recent years, many biophysical studies investigate protein aggregation in vitro to clarify at a fundamental level this complex process occurring in biological system. The self-assembly process is often triggered by a change of the native secondary structure of the protein under destabilizing conditions. Despite the difference in sequence and structure of the aggregating proteins, the final aggregates share similar morphology, with fibrils containing very stable and ordered intermolecular beta-sheet structure perpendicular to the fibril axis. Moreover, not only disease-related proteins but also non-pathogenically proteins are able to form in vitro amyloid fibrils. These findings indicate the existence of a general aggregation mechanism. Indeed, for many systems protein aggregation can be described as a nucleated-polymerization process characterized by a nucleation phase, necessary to produce a critical concentration of meta-stable oligomers. As soon as such critical concentration is formed, the nuclei elongate by fast addiction of available monomers. While fibril formation and characterization is widely studied in the literature, the oligomers formation at early stages of aggregation is still not clear. Moreover, the effect of environmental factors such as pH, temperature, nature of solvent, nature and concentration of added salt, denaturant agents addition, protein folding-unfolding process and seeds on the aggregation process are still under debate. b) Bio-Nanotechnology: In recent years, several synthetic ionic-complementary peptides have been designed to undergo spontaneous self-assembly and form different stable, chemically and mechanically resistant structures. These biomaterials found many relevant applications in biological (3D cell cultures), medical (drug delivery, tissue engineering) and nanotechnological field. However, the aggregation stability behavior of these peptides, in particular during production processes, is not completely under control. Understanding at a fundamental level the effect of operative parameters (such as peptide concentration, pH and ionic strength) on the peptide stability is crucial to optimize industrial production and product quality. The objective of this project is to investigate the kinetic and mechanism of protein nucleation and fibril growth using a combination of experimental characterization and modeling activities. An ionic-complementary self-assembling peptide and model amyloidogenic proteins (e.g. insulin, light chain) are considered. The effect of several operative parameters on the protein aggregation c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> in vitro is characterized by several biophysical techniques: Dynamic and Static Light Scattering, chromatography, fluorescence and absorbance assays, Circular Dichroism, Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy, SDS-PAGE, electron microscopy and Atomic Force Microscopy. Results are rationalized and interpreted in the frame of mass action models based on population balance approach.