  Understanding and Predicting Iron-based Superconductivity from First Principles  
The newest class of superconducting materials, the iron pnictides, display a unique coupling between structural, magnetism and superconductivity. We use Density Functional Theory to look at these relationships with the aim of understanding and predicting new Fe-pnictide-type materials. 
The discovery of iron-based superconductors has ushered in renewed excitement into the field of superconductivity and materials science[1]. Both theoretical and experimental work have rapidly identified the importance of the structure, magnetism and superconductivity in this new class of materials[2,3,4]. While the pairing mechanism is still unknown, most agree that magnetism plays a key role in the onset of superconductivity, contrary to the Matthias rules which precluded magnetic materials from being superconducting. Density functional theory provides a unique tool for investigating both the electronic and magnetic properties of the Fe-pnictide superconducting parent compounds. Structural and magnetic properties can be tuned at will in order to quantify coupling between these parameters, in addition to their effects on the electronic structure of the system. The nested Fermi surface, inevitably linked with the onset of antiferromagnetic ordering, has also been shown to be important in understanding the onset of superconductivity. This project's aims are twofold; first to elucidate the structural-magnetic coupling using first principles calculations for a selection of the Fe-pnictide superconducting parent compounds, and also to use this knowledge in the prediction of novel superconducting materials. Part of the latter involves incorporating the 'Fe-As' superconducting layer into new heterostructures to study how the electronic and magnetic properties change in a different chemical environment, such as FeAs/GaAs heterostructures. Y. Kamihara, H. Hiramatsu, M. Hirano, R. Kawamura, H. Yanagi, T. Kamiya and H. Hosono. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10012. D. C. Johnston, Adv. Phys., 2010, 59, 803. D. Johrendt, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 10, 1039. I.I. Mazin, Nature, 2010, 464 183. S. M. Griffin and N. A. Spaldin, 2011, arXiv:1108.2963v1