  Technical, economic and environmental assessment of chemical processes by applying a systematic retrofit method  
This project aims at the development of a systematic retrofit framework for chemical processes considering technical, economical and environmental objectives expressed by appropriate indicators. The indicators relative importance is determined and heuristical retrofit actions are evaluated.
The objective of this project is to define a generic procedure that enables the identification of the root causes of deficiencies that characterize a chemical process. This methodology has to be able to analyze either a continuous or a batch process; it makes use of the path flow decomposition algorithm and of the indicators related to these path flows. A set of proper objective functions summarizes in a quantitative way the global environmental impact of the process, its inherent safety and hazard level, its profitability, the costs for waste disposal and the degree of integration of the mass and the energy flows present in the process. The task of local sensitivity analysis serves to qualitatively identify those indicators whose variations determine relevant changes of such functions and suggest the directions of process improvement (such as in profitability, safety or pollution reduction). On the basis of these results, itSs possible to create a rank of the compounds that, in order of priority, should undergo mass integration (through direct recycle and design of mass exchange network) in order to specifically improve one or more objective function. For each element of the rank, an optimization problem is solved and a new process scenario is consequently created and, for each one, the vector of objective functions is calculated. The values of all these vectors are compared with the base case vector in order to check the improvements achieved and the possible presence of conflicting objectives in case of integration of specific compounds. A new indicator designating the potential for integration of the path flows will be created so that the rank of compounds that are to be integrated is consistent with the rank obtained according to one or more objective functions. The path flow decomposition framework will therefore give the possibility to systematically select the compounds that should be recovered and define the optimal recycling extent. In the present work, the complementarity of path flow decomposition and process integration is also studied.