  Inflammation-mediated epigenetic priming of neurodevelopmental disease  
This research aims to establish a novel role of epigenetic mechanisms in translating the adverse long-term effects of prenatal maternal infection on brain and behavioral abnormalities emerging in the first-generation and second-generation descendants. 
Environmental insults in early life produce long-lasting consequences for adult brain functioning. A large body of epidemiological data demonstrates a link between maternal infection during pregnancy and higher incidence of psychiatric conditions with a presumed neurodevelopmental origin (e.g., schizophrenia and autism) among the offspring. Converging evidence suggests that cytokineassociated inflammatory events, together with downstream pathophysiological processes such as oxidative stress and hypoferremia, are critical in mediating the adverse effects of maternal infection on the offspring. However, it remains essentially unknown how such early-life adversity translates into enduring negative effects on brain and behavior postnatally. One feasible but yet unexplored possibility would be that the long-term consequences of prenatal immune challenge may result from early-life priming of epigenetic modifications, i.e. through changes in gene expression without altering the DNA code. This research aims to establish a novel role of epigenetic mechanisms in translating the adverse long-term effects of prenatal maternal infection on brain and behavioral abnormalities emerging in the first-generation descendants, and to explore the possibility of trans-generational transmission of these pathological effects across subsequent generations. Using a well-established experimental mouse model of prenatal immune challenge, the planned project will identify putative epigenetic modifications in direct descendants of gestationally immune-challenged mothers and in subsequent generations, and to ascertain the functional contribution of such epigenetic alterations to long-term brain and behavioral dysfunctions with a particular emphasis on abnormalities relevant to schizophrenia and autism. The experimental model is based on maternal gestational treatment with poly(I:C), a synthetic analog of virus-specific double-stranded RNA that stimulates a cytokineassociated viral-like inflammatory response in the maternal and fetal compartments, including the fetal brain. A multi-disciplinary approach combining a wide spectrum of epigenetic, behavioral, pharmacological, and neuroanatomical techniques is used to provide ground-breaking insights into epigenetic factors underlying the link between prenatal infection and risk of neurodevelopmental brain disorders. This will be achieved by (i) identifying epigenetic changes in key neuronal targets such as the GABAergic and dopaminergic systems, (ii) correlating the anticipated epigenetic modifications with behavioral and cognitive disturbances, (iii) confirming the contribution of identified epigenetic changes to behavioral impairments by pharmacological interventions, and (iv) exploring transgenerational pathological and epigenetic effects of prenatal immune challenge. In summary, the proposed research contains novel and highly topical experimental investigations which aim to obtain imperative new information with respect to the role of epigenetic factors in mediating longterm (and possibly trans-generational) brain and behavioral pathology following prenatal exposure to immune challenge.