  Methane production in wild herbivore species of differing digestive anatomy and physiology  

The production of methane is one side effect of the microbial fermentation in the gastrointestinal tract of herbivores. It has been studied intensively in domestic ruminants, because methane con´ tributes to the global SgreenhouseS effect and also represents an energy loss for the animal that results in lower digestive efficiency. In contrast to studies in domestic ruminants, methane production has not been systematically investigated in wild animals, and a large-scale comparative understanding of methane production in mammalian herbivores in terms of species, taxonomic groups, different digestive strategies or physiology is missing. Recent experimental results indicate that methane production scales linearly with body mass, and that the main difference between mammalian herbivores is that between ruminants and non-ruminants, but not within individual non-ruminant groups. However, the database is still too small with respect to species investigated. Based on these results, we hypothesize that methane production i) increases linearly with body mass across a large body size range in both ruminants and camelids (which are functional ruminants but non-ruminants in respect to taxonomy) ii) is, within functional ruminants, higher in ´ ´ ruminants than in camelids, and iii) higher in SconventionalS ruminants than in Smoose-typeS ruminants with particular adaptations including moose and roe deer. To test these hypotheses, methane production, along with feed intake and digestibility, is measured by chamber respirometry in 11 different species of functional ruminants on a lucerne diet. Additionally, based on former studies on dogs and guinea pigs, we hypothesize that rumen motility is reduced and digesta passage from the rumen slowed down under the condition of a high methane level. This will be tested by the insufflation of different amounts of methane into the rumen of fistulated cattle. This project will facilitate a comprehensive overview over methane production across many mammalian herbivore species, and thus allow defining species factors such as body mass or digestive strategy that are responsible for variation in methane production between species. The additional experiment on the influence of methane on motility and passage will be a first test for a potentially adaptive relevance of harbouring methanogenes for herbivores.