  GeoVITe - Geodata Visualisation and Interactive Training Environment  
Development of a geodata portal for ETH Zurich and its affiliated research  institutions.
The GeoVITe aims to offer a better solution for the distribution of geodata to the ETH researchers: a visual, easy-to-use and online accessible option to the traditional file system distribution. On GeoVITe user interface (GeoVITe User Interface), the user is provided with the following functionalities: visualization, coordinate display, switching product layers on and off, navigation through the available data (drop-down lists and layers) and through the map (zoom in and out, pan, navigation history forward and backward, recenter and zoom to full extent) followed by a graphical selection possibility (set dataframe), overview map for a better orientation, name search capabilities, graphical selection based on map sheet (with map sheet number display), selection based on coordinates, 3D visualization (Visualize 3D in GeoVITe), query of features and showing of their attributes (Get Feature Info in GeoVITe), reprojection, generation of contour lines from digital elevation models and, the most important, the download possibility (GeoVITe Download Cart). The system architecture employed for GeoVITe (GeoVITe System Architecture) is a three-tierarchitecture. The three-tier architectural design pattern has three main constitutive components corresponding to the data tier, the logic tier and the presentation tier (Eckerson, 1995). Geodata is stored in databases, which are accessed by a GIS Server. The user has access only to the graphical user interface, which replies to the user interactions by sending requests and listening to responses from the GIS server. The server, in its turn, by means of services, looks for the right data in the database, does necessary processing to it and sends the response back to the user interface. For a more detailed description of the entire system, please refer to Iosifescu, Iosifescu, Jenny and Hurni (2011) or Iosifescu, Iosifescu and Hurni (2013). In July 2010 we released the operational Beta Version, which has since been continuously updated and enriched. It came to be an online tool highly used by researchers in their need for geodata, with enthusiastic reports from the ETH employees and students, and a great potential for replacing the file system for geodata distribution. In 2013 we opened the Platform for users from other research institutes in the ETH Domain (EPFL, WSL, EAWAG and PSI) for testing purposes. The need for geodata is increasing and other education and research institutes from Switzerland would like to join and have access to GeoVITe. This becomes a challenge due to system scalability issues, which we will be addressing in the near future.