  Vortices in Type II Superconductors  
We study vortex matter in type II superconductors, in particular effects of thermal and quantum fluctuations driving various types of phase transitions and quenched disorder defining the superconducting properties of real materials.
We have contributed to the development of the new Vortex Matter phenomenology in disordered and strongly fluctuating type II superconductors: Particular research topics studied in the past are the theory of classical and quantum creep of vortices, classical and quantum melting, including a density functional theory describing bulk and surface melting of the pancake-vortex lattice in layered superconductors, the decoupling transition in layered systems, anisotropic scaling theory, quantum depinning, weak collective pinning and functional renormalization group theory, strong pinning, correlated disorder, vortex dynamics, Hall effect, vortex charge, the van der Waals attraction between vortices, the structure of vortices in d-wave superconductors, and the electronic structure and dissipation in moderately clean superconductors. Recently, we have studied a superconducting implementation (with a dynamically asymmetric SQUID) of a novel macroscopic quantum effect, where a composite system made from a classical and a quantum degree of freedom may drag itself out of its metastable state by a sequential quantum-classical decay process (Munchhausen effect). Ongoing research efforts concentrate on static and dynamical aspects of strong pinning and its crossover to the weak collective pinning scenario, the zero-field superconductor to normal transition in bi- and multilayer systems, the flux penetration into samples of complex shape (geometrical barriers), and the c-axis transport in layered material. Literature: G. Blatter, M.V. Feigel'man, V.B. Geshkenbein, A.I. Larkin, and V.M. Vinokur, Vortices in high temperature superconductors, Rev. Mod. Phys. 66, 1125 (1994). G. Blatter and V.B. Geshkenbein, Vortex Matter, in Superconductivity, Conventional and Unconventional Superconductors, Volume 1, eds. K.H. Bennemann and J.B. Ketterson (Springer, Berlin, 2008), pp 495.