  Advanced Network and Agent Infrastructure for the Support of Federations of Workflow TradingSystems (ANAISOFT)  

 Today globalization of markets induces increased competition. Companies are challenged daily to find new ways of reducing costs and augmenting their sales. The notion of "temporary networks" is a paradigm that is more and more applied in industry, where contractors form and reform cooperating groups for each project. Essential technologies in emerging business-to-business electronic commerce scenarios are workflow systems, agent platforms and communication infrastructures. Workflow systems are fundamental for supporting the coordination activities required to trigger the insourcing and outsourcing of activities. Automated workflow trading systems may further be built to catalyze the development of new electronic markets by facilitating contacts between insourcers and outsourcers. However, current solutions need to provide better support for flexibility, performance and security. In response to these issues, this project proposes to study the creation of secure and responsive Federations of Workflow Trading Systems (FWTS) using intelligent and mobile agent technology. In workflow trading systems, bidding protocols, structure of catalogues and ways to describe activities can vary from case to case, depending on the application domains. A high degree of flexibility is needed to cope with the specifics of each marketplace. Moreover, depending on the needs of insourcers and outsourcers, electronic markets might be composed either of small and/or privately owned markets, or of open markets with large numbers of unknown actors; if the volume of trading and of requested workflow executions augment, the performance of the system must remain stable. Efficiency may then be ensured by extensions with new trading systems for sharing the load. Hence, by organizing multiple trading systems as a federation, we expect that these flexibility and performance issues will be answered.