  COST E55: Modelling the Performance of Timber Structures  
The safe and sustainable use of materials in construction necessitates that  the life-cycle performance of structures can be predicted and reassessed with high accuracy. The current project aims for a better understanding of structural timber for the application in a sustainable build environment.
The safe and sustainable use of materials in construction necessitates that the life-cycle performance of structures can be predicted and reassessed with sufficient accuracy. Recent research achievements in the field of materials science and structural reliability provide a framework for the quantification of safety, durability and life-cycle costs of structures. These achievements are so far mainly used in the field of concrete and steel structural engineering. The knowledge about the behaviour of timber materials and structures is still considered as being insufficient for its use in such a framework. The aim and main objective of the proposed research project is to provide the basic framework and knowledge required for the efficient and sustainable use of timber as a structural and building material. This will be achieved by building on four main research activities: the identification and modelling of relevant load and environmental exposure scenarios, the improvement of knowledge concerning the behaviour of timber structural elements, the development of a generic framework for the assessment of the life-cycle vulnerability and robustness of timber structures, and the improvement of methods for the evaluation of the strength and stiffness behaviour of existing timber structures. The proposed research project will be conducted in connection with the COST action E55. The expected achievements of the proposed research project will provide major contributions to this COST action. Simultaneously the COST action E55 will provide a platform of international experts to frequently discuss critically the achievements of the research project to the benefit of the overall impact and relevance of the work.