  Stepped Spillways  
Stepped spillways allow to continuously dissipate a considerable amount of the kinetic energy. Also, the cavitation risk along the spillway decreases due to smaller flow velocities. Nowadays stepped spillways tend to be designed for increasing dam heights and design discharges. 
The interest on stepped spillways is still growing, because of the cost efficient construction method using Roller Compacted Concrete (RCC). Compared with smooth spillway chutes the unit flood discharge is smaller. For small discharges limited so far up to some 20 m2/s where no cavitation risk was observed. But some dams do not allow wide chutes because of topography. And so some RCC-dams were built with a covered downstream face, which generates a smooth spillway chute. The placement of the Conventional Vibrated Concrete (CVC) is more cost extensive and needs more time in the building process. At stepped spillways there can be observed two different kinds of flow, nappe flow and skimming flow. Nappe flow is a sequence of free falling water jets over steps into pools. The energy dissipation process is mainly affected by turbulent interactions of the plunging jets. Skimming flow occurs at higher flow discharges. It appears as a coherent stream flowing over the steps. The external edges of the steps form a pseudo-bottom over which the flow skims. Underneath the pseudo-bottom, vortices develop and recirculation is maintained through the transmission of shear stress from the main stream. Small-scale vorticity is also generated at the corner of the steps. Most of the flow energy is dissipated to maintain the circulation of the vortices. These procedures are well known for the aerated uniform flow. Some equations are available to design stepped spillways. In the present study more parameters shall be included and the set of equations for the design process shall be easier to handle. Therefore data are analysed and functions for fitting are established. Further investigations at a physical model will focus on the upper part of stepped spillways, where different crest types will be adjusted. Further aims are the dependence of spray development on the construction of the dam crest for small discharges and better knowledge of the unaerated transition flow zone.