  Man Machine Interaction - Interface Design: Perceived Emotional Content (PEC)  

 The question "do products elicit emotions?" - is not the issue in this project. It is already clear that products do influence us emotionally. Actual examples are consumer products as cell-phones, watches, kitchen-equipment. These "emotions-in-products" are making their way from being one of many marketing factors to becoming a pressing factor in product design and marketing. The PEC-project investigates how to measure emotions elicited by products. This is immensely important, for how can you otherwise manipulate, form, and react to something you can not describe exactly? We are developing the PEC-Tool for this purpose. A first prototype of our test method implemented as the PEC-Tool has already been made. First experiments have supported our method and test concept. The method produces results enabling a differentiation between products on different emotional measures. The development of the PEC-tool is a matter of continuous research, addressing also questions like how to present and visualise PEC-results for designers and for marketing purposes. We chose a visual, projective approach for the PEC-Tool: A 'build a person designer' was developed with Macromedia Director, which enables people to build a person by selecting body parts and clothes from a library. The tool can be used without experience, and it automatically logs all activities and selections performed in a log-file. The method includes an interview with the person who has created a Manikin, we measure the relation between Manikin & Product & Test Person. We aim for a tool supporting designers in developing products fitting to a defined emotion profile. Anyway, market profiles do change over time and they even may be misleading. Producers may ask why a product does not have the expected or wanted success, or why a product only sells good in some European countries and not in other. The PEC-Tool offers data for analysing of how or why a given product is emotionally positioned in the market.