  Group structures and feeding management of horses in group housing  

Group housing of horses is considered to be an appropriate type of housing of this species, because it corresponds best to the needs of the socially living motional animals. In Switzerland, this type of housing is increasingly common for adult horses but also questions issues of group composition, design of the housing system and feeding management. In particular, with limited or inadequate space conditions and undefined dominance relationships or competition for a limited resource, horses show increased motivation for aggressive behaviour with a consequently higher risk of injury and negative effects on the welfare of the animals. Currently, there are few scientific studies on the social behaviour of adult horses in group housing conditions and methods for the qualitative assessment of social structures are hardly known. In this project, therefore, social structures are examined involving factors of group composition and the design of group housing systems from an ethological point of view. By observation of agonistic and socio-positive behaviour and the survey of neighbour preferences as well as measurements of lying behaviour, activity during feeding and the physiological parameters heart rate and heart rate variability in non-competitive and competitive situations, indicators that allow qualitative statements about the dominance structure and compatibility of the horses within the group are to be found by means of social network analysis and further be used concerning the optimization of group-housing systems and, where appropriate, feeding management in practice. On this basis, the conditions on Swiss farms and the effectiveness of advice concerning optimization by means of an intervention study are evaluated in two further parts of the project. The status quo of group housing on Swiss farms and the implementation of the new animal welfare act are to be assessed by means of interviews with horse keepers, the use of validated indicators of behavioural observations and assessment of housing conditions. The findings will then be used in an intervention study concerning a possible improvement of animal welfare in group housing. Based on the impact of farm specific suggestions for improvement on the validated indicators of social structures, feasible measures to improve the compatibility of the horses within the group and, therefore, well-being should be derived. Findings can be applied in advisory and monitoring activities by professionals and by the horse keepers.