  XSENSE2 - MEMS acoustic detectors for natural hazard warning systems  
Understanding, controlling and minimizing the risk associated with changes in our natural environment is of major societal interest. X-Sense2 contributes to the reduction of this growing gap between supply and demand by technological development and scientific advance.
Understanding, controlling and minimizing the risk associated with changes in our natural environment is of major societal interest. An accelerating growth in the need for risk-reduction methods and technology is caused by three superimposed trends: 1. growing vulnerability through expansion of infrastructure and human activity into intrinsically hazardous environments such as mountains; 2. increased hazard potentials due to climate change; 3. a reduced acceptance of risk due to increasing subjective and objective needs for safety X-Sense2 contributes to the reduction of this growing gap between supply and demand by technological development and scientific advance. It investigates a complete data chain from custom designed sensor technology over networking, data-based storage and processing towards new discoveries in environmental sciences and new, more effective technologies for early warning. Steep bedrock in high-alpine regions such as the European Alps is influenced by seasonal frost or permafrost. Knowledge of processes and factors affecting slope instability is essential for detecting and monitoring potentially hazardous slopes. In the attempt to understand or anticipate movement, a combination of differing sensed variables and sensing modalities is usually employed. This includes displacement (GPS, crack meters), seismic/acoustic signals, repeat imagery, and environmental data such as temperatures, precipitation etc. The researchersS previous projects (www.permasense.ch) have resulted in significant progress in the design and operation of integrated wireless sensing systems suitable for long-term autonomous operation in harsh environments, c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> the end-to-end integration of the measurements made, and the inclusion of power-optimized comprehensive measurements such as continuous GPS and acoustic emission data. The current state of the art in sensing systems is based on continuous oversampling and subsequent filtering of the digital data acquired to extract meaningful information. The significant power and data rates associated to important modalities such as GPS and acoustic emission inherently 1. necessitate heavy infrastructure in the field for energy harvesting, 2. require large amount of data to be stored and communicated and 3. impose the difficulty to differentiate signals relevance from the noise generated by other phenomena. This big data problem effectively constitutes a showstopper with respect to wide applicability. X-Sense2 will follow a new path by exploiting advances in MEMS technology to achieve a triggerbased duty-cycling of complex sensing systems by monitoring acoustic events. This partial relocation of signal analysis and decision-making from the computing domain to the sensor itself will enable close to zero standby-power. The sensing device will be based on a new class of mechanical switches which is highly sensitive and frequency selective. The potential of such an approach is huge and will be explored in X-Sense2: Use the triggering signal to wake up other types of sensor at the same or other locations as well as using the detailed frequency-dependent triggering information as a new modeling input for geoscientific investigations and early warning. This new approach needs scientific advances in MEMS sensor design as well as event-based sensing architectures, adaptive communication and distributed control. In addition, it will only be successful if based on a close interaction between engineering sciences, geosciences, industry and public stakeholders. The analysis of comprehensive acoustic field measurements will provide a characterization of the signals to be used as triggers. The multi-scale approach of X-Sense2, which combines various sensing modalities, is a key factor of success. Measuring displacement with crack meters in rock faces and with continuous GPS on more gentle slopes, is a proxy for the high-magnitude low-frequency hazards under investigation because cumulatively, it can lead to slope failure. X-Sense2 combines expertise and research groups from all relevant disciplines and by doing so, effectively leverages the potential of Swiss research and educates a next generation of scientists and engineers able to address complex environmental problems with modern technology in innovative ways. There are several industrial companies participating in the project contributing in terms of knowhow, service and industrial exploitation. The project will construct demonstrators of the technologies to advance our knowledge about the complex processes in the mountain cryosphere, to utilize the corresponding scientific concepts to improve quality of life and security of people, and to show the opportunities for public and economic stakeholders.