  Semiactive Control for Magnetor-heological (MR) dampers by combining Control Methodologies with System Identification (SI) Methods 
The development of smart materials, intelligent structures and technolo-  gies has recently received significant attention in the field of structural engineering. It is therefore necessary to design efficient and precise monitoring systems for such structures.
The development of smart materials, intelligent structures and technologies has recently received significant attention in the field of structural engineering. It is therefore necessary to design efficient and precise monitoring systems for such structures. This task is enabled by suitable equipment such as sensors, actuators and controllers [1]. A number of different control mechanisms has been developed (i.e. active, semi-active) [2] depending on the complexity and demands of the structural system in question. Recent studies indicate that the LQR controller is one of the most robust control algorithms in mitigating vibration response. However, the drawback of using LQR is the selection of optimal weight matrices Q and R. Conventionally this has been done based on designer experience or on the trial and error method [3]. At the beginning of this project an experiment of a 5 storied shear frame is performed in the Structural Engineering lab at EMPA under the supervision of Dr. F. Weber. As a first step, the structural parameters of the scaled model setup are identified from the system response. Afterwards detailed studies are carried out in order to design an optimal controller. This is carried out by evaluating different nonlinear optimization techniques (i.e. Genetic Algorithm, Particle Swarm Optimization and Gradient Based Optimization) in an off-line mode. Moving to one step further, to perform this process on-line, the optimal controller is combined with unscented Kalman filter (UKF). Preumont A. Vibration control of active structures: an introduction. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2nd edition, 2004. Boston C Weber F Guzzella L Optimal semi-active damping of cables: evolutionary algorithms and closedform solutions Smart Mater. Struct. 18 (2009) 055006 (9pp). Mobaieen S., Mohamady B., Ghorbani H., and Rabii A. Optimal Control Design Using Evolutionary Algorithms with Application to an Aircraft Landing System. Journal of Basic and Applied Scientific Research, 2(2):1876U1882, 2012.