  Development of a high sensitivity mass spectrometry source for geological applications 
In this project, we will develop and optimize a new ion source for thermal ionisation mass spectrometry with superior ionization efficiency and transmission. This project is done in collaboration with CEA (Commissariat à l'Energie Atomique, France).
The overall efficiency of a mass spectrometer, i.e. the fraction of sample atoms that are ionised and transported to the detector, is one of the most important parameters characterising the system and often sets the limit of the smallest sample size analysable with the system. In conventional thermal ionisation mass spectrometry (TIMS) samples are mounted on heated filaments. Sample atoms are free to evaporate from the filament and are lost if not ionised via surface ionisation. In comparison, with a thermal ionisation cavity source the sample is loaded into a heated cavity, which is open to the mass spectrometer only through an orifice. Sample atoms evaporating from the inner cavity walls will therefore predominantly hit the opposite wall and get another chace of being ionised. The goal is to preferentially extract the surface ionised sample atoms for mass analysis by applying an electrical field outside the orifice while confining as many neutral sample atoms as possible inside the cavity, hence increasing the ionisation efficiency of the ion source. The shape and size of the cavity has a large effect on the ionisation efficiency of the source. By simulation with an in-house developed software tool the ionisation efficiency of a cavity geometry can be calculated almost independently from other influencing parameters and therefore optimised. As a result a prototype thermal ionisation cavity source will be built with a hopefully already close-to-optimal cavity geometry. The goal of the project is not only to maximise the ionisation efficiency of the source, thus enabling a substantial reduction in the analysable sample size. By taking all parameters relevant to a measurement into account, in the end, a high-sensitivity ion source should be available for the analysis of samples from geological applications that are out of reach of present-day technology.