  Using oxygen isotopes associated to phosphorus to understand phosphorus cycling in the soil/plant system  
Oxygen stable isotopes in phosphate used in the plant/soil system to understand the biological transformations controlling P availability and speciation in soils.
Phosphorus (P) inputs are indispensable to sustain agricultural production. However, on one side P is a non-renewable resource and on the other side excessive P inputs in agro-ecosystems lead to P losses and water quality degradation. For a more efficient use of P in the future, we need a better understanding of the biological reactions controlling the availability of soil P to plants. Research conducted in marine and coastal environments showed that the natural abundance of oxygen stable isotopes (18O/16O) associated to P (18O-P) can be used to study the biological transformations of P and trace P derived from specific sources. Using the available knowledge, we develop a conceptual model that shows the potential of this isotopic approach to study the P cycle in soil systems. We recently succeeded in optimizing a purification method to quantify the 18O of P compounds extracted from soils with HCl, which solves the methodological problems that until now hampered progresses in this field. The overall aim of this project is to develop an isotope approach, using 18OP, to be used in the plant/soil system to gather information on the biological transformations controlling P availability and speciation in soils. The project will provide the first systematic approach to understand the 18O-P fractionation induced by the various processes controlling P fluxes in the soil/plant system. The 1st goal of the project is to further adapt our purification protocol to measure 18O-P in different soil P pools (phosphate bound to oxides, organic P) and to assess on a range of soils whether the 18O-P signatures of these different P pools show systematic differences. The 2nd goal is to understand how abiotic and biological processes affect the 18O-P of orthophosphate in the soil solution. Using the developed tools and the acquired knowledge, the 3rd goal of the project is to test our conceptual model and assess the importance of biological processes on P cycling in three soil systems: (i) during the early stages of soil development in a glacier forefield, (ii) in a long term field experiment assessing the effect of different cropping systems on crop production and soil fertility and (iii) in a P-limited soil under semi-arid climatic conditions.