  Greenhouse gas mitigation options for organic Basmati rice production in Uttarakhand, India  
this project aims to quantify emissions of the potent greenhouse gases n2o and ch4 from organic basmati rice production systems a range of irrigation and fertilizer management in Uttarakhand, India. 
Description The research is situated in the context of an agricultural development project on sustainable organic and fair-trade Basmati rice production in Uttarakhand, India, implemented by Helvetas Swiss Intercooperation in collaboration with Intercooperation Social Development India. The development project targets smallholder farmers in the Himalayan foothill areas of Uttarakhand, India, who typically operate mixed livestock-cropping systems, in which farmyard manure and compost are the primary sources of nutrient inputs, along with application of need-based synthetic fertilizers and pesticides. The farmers in the region are marginal and smallholder farmers, faced with difficult working conditions, high input costs and low returns on food grain crops, sparse settlement, soil erosion, land degradation, limited market access and inadequate infrastructure such as transport facilities (Tuteja, 2013). In line with the vision of the government of Uttarakhand, the development project promotes transitioning into organic farming as a risk-adverse strategy to overcome these challenges, given the low requirements for cash investment, the focus on increasing soil fertility and reducing environmental harm, and the price advantage of new markets both at the international and national level (Singh and George, 2010). However, little is know about the effect of organic management in low input rice systems on GHG emissions, and how low input organic rice management can be optimized to minimize GHG emissions while safeguarding productivity. Current research indicates that organic inputs, including farmyard manure and green manure, cause greater greenhouse gas emissions compared to synthetic fertilizers, mainly due to a stimulation of CH4 emissions (Linquist et al., 2012; Bhatia et al., 2013). Meanwhile, alternative wetting and drying typically decreases CH4 emissions but increases N2O emissions compared to continuous flooded rice systems, while reducing the water requirements for rice cultivation (Pathak et al., 2002; Pathak et al., 2003). However, most experiments assessing the effect of nutrient or water management on greenhouse gas emission and productivity were executed assuming unlimited availability to resources and inputs. It remains to be tested if such treatment effects hold true at much smaller input rates representative of smallholder farmersS practice. Materials and methods A field trial was established at Govind Ballabh Pant University of Agriculture & Technological (GBPUAT), focusing on a set of eight management strategies, including different nutrient input rates, nutrient sources and water management, ranging from standard farmersS practice to currently recommended best management practice for organic Basmati production in the region. The management strategies were selected after consultation of expert knowledge and stakeholders input, taking into account current farm realities and feasible means for farmers to build farm capital, and are defined as follows: Chemical control (C-C): Standard farmersS practice with synthetic fertilizers (NPK 50-30-20 kg ha-1) and chemical pesticides under continuous flooding. (NPK = nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium). Note that this nutrient input rate is only half of the agronomic recommended rate, but represents common farmersS availability of resources, as per baseline survey conducted in the project area. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> Organic control (O-C): Standard farmersS practice with organic fertilizer (10 Mg farmyard manure (FYM) ha-1, equivalent to NPK 50-30-20 kg ha-1) under continuous flooding. Organic alternative wetting and drying (O-AWD): The same as O-C, but with alternative wetting and drying (AWD) as a measure for water savings and greenhouse gas emissions reductions. Organic AWD with biogas slurry application (O-AWD-BGS): The same as O-AWD, but FYM is gasified in a biogas plant and the remaining biogas slurry (from initial 10 Mg FYM) is applied to the field. Biogas plants reduce labor needs for fuel wood collection and alleviate pulmonary diseases caused by smoke exposure during cooking (Srinivasan, 2008). System of rice intensification (O-SRI): The same as O-AWD, but seedlings are transplanted earlier, one seedling at a time, and with greater row spacing. SRI is an agroecological approach to improve low-input rice systems, and has gained popularity as a pro-poor approach for improving rice yields, both in Africa and Asia (Uphoff, 2003; Stoop, 2011). Organic AWD with green manure (O-AWD-GM): The same as O-AWD, but green manure is grown between rabi (dry/winter season, upland crop cultivation) and kharif (wet/monsoon season, rice cultivation), aimed at increasing nutrient inputs and improving soil fertility. Organic AWD complemented with vermicompost (O-AWD-VC): The same as O-AWD, but with an additional input of 5 Mg vermicompost (VC) ha-1 (composted from 10 Mg FYM). The total nutrient input sums up to the equivalent of roughly NPK 100-60-40 kg ha-1, which is the recommended rate for Basmati rice in the region. This treatment investigates which benefits could be obtained if farmers had access to greater organic nutrient inputs. Organic direct seeded rice intercropped with soy (O-DSR-INT): Rice is directly seeded in the furrows and subjected to life saving irrigation, while soybean is grown on the alternating ridges. FYM is applied at a rate of 10 Mg ha-1. This experimental treatment is designed to save water, and increase agrobiodiversity and N input from biological N fixation associated with soy. Static flux chambers are used for the determination of GHG fluxes. For flux measurements, the chambers are closed for a period of 30 minutes, during which gas samples are collected after 0, 10, 20 and 30 minutes. Flux measurements take place daily for 4-6 days after application of organic amendment, tillage and drainage; and once every two weeks in between management events. Sample collection is performed throughout the year, covering the monsoon season (kharif, rice cultivation) and the dry season (rabi, wheat or pulses cultivation). A research assistant at GBPUAT is responsible for taking the gas samples, while the GHG concentrations in the gas samples are determined at the National Physical Laboratory in New Dehli, and coordinated by Intercooperation Social Development India. Crop yields are determined at the end of each cropping cycle. Equipment used Flux chambers, Intercooperation Social Development India and GBPUAT Gas chromatograph, National Physical Laboratory in New Delhi. Preliminary results (with references to graphics that are uploaded in separate file) Data is still being analysed. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> Discussion Data is still begin analysed. Relevant literature Bhatia, A., Jain, N., Pathak, H., 2013. Methane and nitrous oxide emissions from Indian rice paddies, agricultural soils and crop residue burning. Greenhouse Gases: Science and Technology 3, 196-211. Linquist, B.A., Adviento-Borbe, M.A., Pittelkow, C.M., van Kessel, C., van Groenigen, K.J., 2012. Fertilizer management practices and greenhouse gas emissions from rice systems: a quantitative review and analysis. Field Crops Research 135, 10-21. Pathak, H., Bhatia, A., Prasad, S., Singh, S., Kumar, S., Jain, M., Kumar, U., 2002. Emission of nitrous oxide from rice-wheat systems of Indo-Gangetic plains of India. Environmental Monitoring and Assessment 77, 163-178. Pathak, H., Prasad, S., Bhatia, A., Singh, S., Kumar, S., Singh, J., Jain, M., 2003. Methane emissi on from riceUwheat cropping system in the Indo-Gangetic plain in relation to irrigation, farmyard manure and dicyandiamide application. Agriculture, ecosystems & environment 97, 309-316. Singh, S., George, R., 2010. Inputs in Organic Farming: Are They Factual in Plain and Hill Regions of Uttarakhand. Journal of Human Ecology 32, 55-61. Srinivasan, S., 2008. Positive externalities of domestic biogas initiatives: Implications for financing. Renewable and sustainable energy Reviews 12, 1476-1484. Stoop, W.A., 2011. The scientific case for system of rice intensification and its relevance for sustainable crop intensification. International Journal of Agricultural Sustainability 9, 443-455. Tuteja, U., 2013. Agriculture Profile of Uttrakhand. Agricultural Economics Research Centre, University of Delhi, Delhi. Uphoff, N., 2003. Higher yields with fewer external inputs? The system of rice intensification and potential contributions to agricultural sustainability. International journal of agricultural sustainability 1, 38-50.