  Design and fabrication of robust plasmonic devices with tunable resonance frequencies  
Plasmonic resonances of optical antennas consisting of pairs of metallic particles are very sensitive with respect to the gap size. This offers possibilities of mechanical tuning that shall be investigated in this project.
The effect of surface plasmon excitation by light incident to a metal surface was known for decades. However, the interaction of light with metallic nanostructures has become an area of intensive research only recently due to advances of modern fabrication techniques into few nanometer range. Nevertheless, only a few of them have found their applications in commercial devices so far. One of the main reasons for that is that the plasmonic resonance frequencies are extremely sensitive to fabrication inaccuracies. The demands on precision of the designed structures is in a range of few nanometers, but sometimes even in sub-nanometer range, whereas fabrication tolerances in a very best cases are still in a range of few nanometers. In addition, fabricated structures usually have certain imperfections, like surface roughness, corner roundness and non-perfect edges which have also direct impact on the plasmon resonance frequencies. It is known that the spectral position of the plasmonic frequency depends on the size, shape and relative position of the plasmonic structures. However, in practice it is impossible in the nm range to fabricate flat surfaces that are usually considered in simulations. Thus, conventional simulations are often not really close to measurements. Furthermore, macroscopic material models that are used in all well-known field solvers become inaccurate or even invalid for particles or features of 5nm or smaller. At RF, features much smaller than the wavelength may usually be neglected, but at OF, such small features may have a drastic impact on the overall performance. In recent simulations, we showed that a modification of an area of less then 1nm2 near a triple point (where the field may also be enhanced) of a finite CPP waveguide on a dielectric substrate (see Figure 1) may change the field inside the channel by a factor of approximately 10. Such a strong effect might be exploited for steering the light in the channel. At the same time it leads to extreme difficulties concerning fabrication and simulation. It is therefore not surprising at all that simulations of plasmonic structures do often not match well with the results of measurements, but surprisingly there are experimental results in rather good agreement with simulations despite of fabrication tolerances, surface roughness, etc. One of the goals of this project is to study why this is a case and development of new design algorithms, which take into account fabrication tolerances and critical types of imperfections. The resolution of modern lithographic techniques is now heading into sub-10 nm range. However, in such a small range even very small difference in the conditions during the sample preparation may lead to fabrication errors comparable to dimensions of the fabricated structures. In case of plasmonic structures this leads to uncontrollable shifts of plasmonic resonance frequencies and difference of their performance compare to designs. In this project we will demonstrate that shifts of plasmonic resonances due to fabrication inaccuracies can be compensated by mechanical stretching of substrates, containing plasmonic structures. Plasmonic antennas (structures, consisting of two metal patches with a small gap in between) posses most intriguing properties among different types of plasmonic structures. Plasmonic antennas are capable to concentrate electrical field in the small space of few nanometer between antenna structures [CH4], which allow enhancing electromagnetic field to several orders of magnitude. Such structures have a high application potential in waveguide application [CH5], light sources, detectors, and sensors. In order to achieve a high c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> field enhancement the gap in antenna structures should be as small as possible. Antenna effects are observed at a distances of a few hundred nanometers between the particles, but huge fields can only be obtained when the gap size is reduced down to few nanometers. Then, varying the gap size leads to a strong shift of the characteristic frequency of plasmonic resonance. Thus, by depositing antenna structures on stretchable substrates we can tune the resonance frequency by tuning the gap size. This effect can be used not only for compensation of fabrication errors, but, for example, also in selective single molecule bio-sensors. Such sensors consist of plasmonic antenna structures and are based on a shift of the plasmonic frequency when molecule is adsorbed near the antenna [CH8] and especially within the gap. Normally, they are used to detect single molecules of certain type. We believe that plasmonic antennas deposited on stretchable substrates will allow not only increasing sensitivity of such sensors, but will also provide an additional freedom for molecular selectivity of the single molecular sensors. This project will consist of a theoretical and a practical part: 1. We will exploit the reasons why some small features are so much sensitive while others seem to have almost no impact on the response of plasmonic structures. We will design and fabricate structures with artificially introduced features, like triple points, rounded corners, and high roughness. We will investigate their impact on the field distribution within the structures and on the plasmon resonance frequencies. We then will develop appropriate design methods of robust plasmonic structures, based on field solvers that fit well to plasmonics processes and take into account fabrication tolerances. 2. We will design and fabricate plasmonic antenna structures, which will take into account fabrication tolerances and additionally will have a possibility to fine tune the gap between antenna structures by mechanical stretching the underlying substrate. We will consider different fabrication methods and types of substrates, which can be used for these experiments and will then apply this method to demonstrate its potential for selective molecular bio-sensing.