  Man-Machine Interaction - Interface Design / E-learning: New-Media Guidelines: http://www.iha.bepr.ethz.ch/newmedia/  

 Our research on interface design and multimedia has resulted in the New-Media Guidelines Website. The guidelines are dedicated to all those developers who do not have time - or take interest in - reviewing project related theory and empirical research. Still, developers employ one of the most important resources for making excellent human-computer interaction (HCI): the know-how for how to manipulate computers to do what they are told to. But the problem is often to know exactly what computers shall do? It is a paradox that there exists a mass of literature on HCI and on multimedia design, and still the impact on practical design is not remarkable. Fortunately, many scientists start to summarise their research as guidelines for developers. Hence, much relevant research is formulated for developers, so there is only one more obstacle to overcome: bring the guidelines to them. These guidelines are related to the various functions and purposes of a computer. The context is exclusively human - computer interaction settings. We have implemented the following structure: - System: Offers guidelines for basic system and functionality design. These guidelines goes beyond information presentation as they also address the HCI of the basic functionality of a computer. - Presentation: Offers guidelines related to information presentation on the system level. These guidelines suggest how to support perception by employing basic information codes like colour, text, characters and contrast optimally. - Interaction: Offers guidelines about the various means of HCI. The interaction guidelines relate to those situations when the user is active. - Media: Offers guidelines for how to employ media in a more complex information presentation context, e.g. for learning or for information content oriented presentations. - Communication: Offers guidelines about how the computer can ease the communicate with its users, and for how computers can support communication with other people.