  Design of Y-junction, Free-space and MMI couplers in silica on Si  

Optical couplers which allow to split the light from one input into several output waveguides  are essential components in the field of integrated optics. Three different types of such couplers are investigated for silica on silicon waveguide structures using the Beam Propagation Method (BPM) that calculates the propagation of light in a structure defined by its two dimensional refractive index profile. The types considered are the Y junction, the free-space coupler and the multi mode interference (MMI) coupler. The Y junction simply splits the light by splitting the waveguide into two arms enclosing a small angle of less than 1 degree. This device has the potential to show very low excess loss (<0.02dB) and is practically wavelength independent. The drawbacks are the limited output channels of two and the technological problems to achieve a proper and high resolution pointed separation of the two output arms. The free-space coupler includes an input waveguide, a free-space section and a number of output waveguides. In the free-space section the light is no more guided in the horizontal direction and propagates freely from the input waveguide end forming a nearly Gaussian horizontal beam distribution. The light is catched up from a number of tightly spaced output waveguides. This coupler component is also wavelength independent and appropriate for high number of outputs (>4). The problem of the inhomogeneous light distribution in horizontal direction can be compensated by changing the output waveguide entrance width. The MMI coupler has the same construction as the free-space device, but the center region is limited in width. This causes light reflection and interference leading to a self-imaging effect. The output of the input waveguide can be imaged to different numbers of outputs depending on the MMI coupler length and width. Equal light distribution in the output waveguides is achieved and fabrication tolerances are less critical than for the Y-couplers. Due to the interferences used these devices are more wavelength sensitive than the two other types.