  Coupled Ecological, Hydrological and Social Dynamics in Restored and Channelized Cor- ridors of a River at the Catchment Scale (RECORD Catchment) 
The RECORD Catchment project investigates what measures are most  effective to influence the river corridor so that river restoration and groundwater flow systems can help to mitigate the effects of floods and droughts, in particular in the con- text of climate and global change.
The RECORD Catchment project investigates what measures are most effective to influence the river corridor so that river restoration and groundwater flow systems can help to mitigate the effects of floods and droughts, in particular in the con- text of climate and global change. The study is centered on the Thur catchment. Future management strategies will be developed based on forecasted climate data in close collaboration with river managers of the Thur catchment. The project includes local- and catchment-scale studies and will improve our understanding of key processes at these scales, including subsurface-surface interactions, and links to climate drivers. The coupled hydrological and hydrogeological model to be developed for the Thur catchment will deliver the scientific basis for the decision making process. This will be done in close collaboration with the river managers. For the economic analysis, a dynamic economic model will be adapted which includes a Dynamic Water Use Model for the specific conditions of representative pilot areas with high potential of extracting water for different water consumption purposes and temporary water storage in retention areas. We provide the current RECORD field sites Niederneun-forn/Altikon and Widen as well as the pre-alpine Rietholzbach catchment as long-term natural hydrological, atmospheric and ecological observatories to study water fluxes, ecological and biogeochemical interactions within the context of climate change. They provide field platforms for further studies and come with a comprehen- sive database, and the ability for data transfer and management. In the end, we plan to distribute a Document of Recom- mendations for Implementation of river restoration projects.