  Nicht-invasive Bestimmung von Vitalparametern mittels optischer Methoden 

The selective analysis of volatile compounds in medical technology, in fire detectors, in food and in environmental technology is of high relevancy. In all these applications itSs the quality of information that plays a crucial role and must exactly fit the needs. For the project described in the title, CCS held the part to develop a carbon dioxide- (CO2)-sensitive optical sensor which was able to replace the electrochemical one. The required features were specified as follows: 1. Optical sensor with an absorption at a wavelength between 600 and 660 nm (no prominent hemoglobin interference); 2. Sensitivity and linearity in the dynamic range of CO2-partial pressure between 2 to 10 vol%; 3. Stability for at least one month; 4. Response within a few seconds; 5. Reversibility; 6. Low sensitivity to humidity. A couple of CO2-sensitive optical sensors had been published earlier, the most prominent one was that by Mills et al. (1994, 1997). The key compound reactive to CO2 was a pH-indicator incorporated into an ethyl-cellulose film. Upon solubilization of CO2 within the film, a spectral change of the indicator occurred. MillsS sensor did match the requirements, the lifetime and the optical properties excepted. Therefore the sensor film served as a reference for all own developments. The objective of the own development was, on the one hand, to elucidate the solubilization and reaction mechanism involved in MillsS membrane, on the other hand, to draw conclusions and to develop a CO2-sensitive sensor film which matched all the required features. The most attractive conclusion of our investigations relied on investigations of the structure-activity relationship between dynamic range and sensitivity of the sensor and structure of the indicator. It was shown that not only the pKa of the indicator but inasmuch the structure of the dye and the basicity of the environment within the film were of utmost importance for the extraction of CO2. The working mechanism of the optical sensor was elucidated by FT-IR-spectroscopy with internal reflection within the polymer film. Firstly, a double beam flow-cell was used and, secondly, operation in chemical modulation mode published by U. Fringeli et al. (1992, 1997, 2002) was applied to achieve the highest possible sensitivity. Collaborations: E. Schmid, Universitätsspital Zürich; M. Loher, B. Schaltegger, G. Meyer, F. Widmer Fachhochschule für Technik, Wirtschaft und Soziale Arbeit, St-Gallen; J. Hayoz, SenTec AG, Therwil, BL.