  R-mu-T relations for seismically isolated structures  
The relations between the strength reduction factor the displacement ductility and the vibration period of the structure have been extensively studied for fixed-base structures. The objective is to investigate this relation for structures seismically isolated using deformable or  sliding devices.
The relations between the strength reduction factor Ry, the displacement ductility µ and the vibration period of the structure Tn have been extensively studied for fixed-base structures by numerous researchers in the past. This project aims at identifying similar behavior ranges for base-isolated structures. The investigation is conducted using a two-degree-of-freedom model of a base-isolated structure. The inelastic behavior of the base isolation devices and the isolated superstructure is simulated in Matlab and OpenSees using a Bouc-Wen model. The response history analyses are conducted first for pulse excitations. The observed trends are verified later through the excitation of the isolated structure by a large number of recorded ground motions. These motions cover a wide range of ground motion types, magnitudes and distances. The effects of base isolation and superstructure design parameters, such as stiffness and strength, are qualified through similitude analysis and quantified through parametric studies. The resulting Ry-µ -Tn relationship for inelastic seismically isolated structures is based on the statistical processing of the inelastic response data of the isolated superstructure. The results indicate that the acceleration sensitive region of the response of an inelastic baseisolated structure extends towards longer periods, while the hysteretic energy and the displacement conservation regions shrink and translate along the period axis. Based on the above stated results it is concluded that the elastic design of base-isolated structures is a necessity derived from the fundamental dynamics of these structures.