  Nonlinear Optical Characterization of Organic Molecules  

 In organic materials, the macroscopically observed nonlinear optical and electro-optical effects can be described as originating from the nonlinear optical properties of their constituent molecules. The basic quantities describing the second (third)-order molecular nonlinearities are called the molecular hyperpolarizability beta (and gamma). Their determination is of fundamental interest for the development of optimized nonlinear optical materials. The hyperpolarizabilities of newly synthesized molecules can be determined with several different experimental methods. The methods to determine the second-order nonlinearities are Electric Field Induced Second Harmonic Generation (EFISH) and Hyper-Rayleigh Scattering (HRS). EFISH is the standard method for the determination of molecular hyperpolarizabilities beta. With this method the dissolved nonlinear optical chromophores are oriented by applying a static electric field. This allows the coherent generation of frequency doubled light, whose intensity is measured. With HRS the scattered light from a solution of the material under investigation is observed. Due to orientational fluctuations, part of the scattered light is frequency doubled. The intensity of this incoherent second harmonic generation is measured and compared with the intensity obtained with a reference solution. Recently both methods were applied for the investigation of a series of newly synthesized hydrazone derivatives, zwitterionic chromophores, and organic salts. Both techniques gave the same experimental results and revealed the large potential of these materials for nonlinear optical and electro-optic applications. For the determination of the third-order nonlinearities gamma third-harmonic generation (THG) in solution is most often used. The experimental set-up is quite similar to EFISH except that (i) no external electric field has to be applied and that (ii) the experiments have to be carried out in vacuum in order to get rid the the contributions to the third-harmonic signal of air. Recently we have shown the importance of the substitution pattern and the functionality (electron donor/acceptor) of the attached end groups for the molecular hyperpolarizability gamma.