  Non-Invasive Imaging of Energy Efficiency in the Cardiovascular System  
The proposed project aims to develop a novel approach to assessing energy efficiency of the cardiovascular system using non-invasive, highly accelerated 3D MR flow measurements. Measurement accuracy will be established relative to 3D Particle Tracking Velocimetry in a realistic aortic phantom.
Cardiovascular diseases remain the major cause of mortality in the Western world accounting for 40% of all deaths. Although diagnostic and therapeutic advances in the field have led to an overall reduction in mortality, direct and indirect cost of cardiovascular diseases continue to rise as a result of an aging population being affected. In order to reduce the overall impact of the disease, early diagnosis has been identified as a key strategy. Beyond global markers, imaging tools have been proposed to interrogate local changes of morphology and function during all stages of the disease. Among these imaging approaches, non-invasive, time-resolved and three-dimensional Magnetic Resonance (MR) measurements of blood flow patterns in the arterial and venous systems have emerged as a new promising avenue. While standard MR flow quantification techniques measure an average velocity per image voxel, recent work has indicated a generalized approach to assessing velocity fluctuations and hence energy dissipation. Accordingly, the ratio of kinetic to dissipated energy becomes accessible and can in principle be mapped throughout the cardiac cycle and in three spatial dimensions non-invasively. In a practical setting, however, the required modifications to conventional MR data acquisition schemes imply very long scan times and would prohibit clinical use. By exploiting expertise in the field of MR scan acceleration, the co-applicants have recently shown that despite the additional data encoding required for mapping energy dissipation, scan times can be reduced manifold by using data undersampling strategies in conjunction with inherent data correlations and Bayesian processing. Preliminary data have been obtained to demonstrate the feasibility of measuring flow and turbulent kinetic energy in healthy subjects and in patients with aortic valve disease. A validation of the method against a gold standard is, however, lacking and, accordingly, conclusions on the accuracy of the method are very limited in particular concerning the relevant scales of turbulence. Among the in-vitro methods available to quantifying mean and fluctuating velocities 3D Particle Tracking Velocimetry (3D-PTV) has gained much attention as it permits the study of complex flow fields in flow chambers and vessels. Recent work of the applicants has demonstrated studies of flow patterns in a realistic aortic cast under pulsatile flow conditions. Previous validation against Laser Doppler Anemometry has proven the accuracy of 3D-PTV for quantifying both mean and fluctuating velocities and hence the method is considered a reference standard. However, experience in using 3D-PTV with pulsatile transient and turbulent flows in distensible vessels is limited and warrants further investigations. It is the objective of the present proposal to establish assessment of vascular energy efficiency through mapping fluid velocities and turbulent kinetic energy using 3D-PTV as a reference modality relative to novel MR methods in a realistic model of the human aorta. Various conditions in the aorta including different valve designs will be tested to determine the overall accuracy of MR based assessment of energy efficiency towards translation of the method into potential clinical use. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> The project envisaged encompasses four main work packages as follows: I. 3D-PTV system characterization using pulsatile flows in a realistic aortic arch determining: T ¸ peak pressure performance T ¸ cycle-to-cycle variation and reproducibility of average and peak velocities T ¸ overall accuracy of turbulent kinetic energy calculation II. Construction of a 3D-PTV setup to study valvular flow and turbulent kinetic energy including: T ¸ normal and transient aortic pulsatile flows T ¸ turbulent flows and scales downstream of valvular constrictions T ¸ flow patterns downstream of stenosed, biological and mechanical heart valve prostheses III. Validation of energy assessment using MR relative to the 3D-PTV reference in aortic phantoms with focus on: T ¸ accuracy of MR based assessment as a function of the number of velocity encodes T ¸ noise performance of MR measurements depending on scan acceleration T ¸ fidelity of MR based turbulent kinetic energy quantification IV. Study of MR based energy assessment in patients with valve disease and healthy controls to establish: T ¸ clinical feasibility of the method T ¸ normal values to discriminate between mild, moderate and severe degradation T ¸ differences between various designs of heart valve prostheses The proposed project aims to validate and further develop a novel approach to assessing energy efficiency of the cardiovascular system using non-invasive, highly accelerated 3D MR flow measurements. Measurement accuracy will be established relative to 3D Particle Tracking Velocimetry in a realistic aortic phantom simulating a wide and relevant range of flow and turbulence conditions. Upon validation in-vitro, the methodology will be translated to the clinical realm to determine differences in energy efficiency in various aortic valve diseases relative to age-matched healthy subjects. This will be the potential starting point of establishing methods of determining energy efficiency of the cardiovascular system as a non-invasive diagnostic tool.