  Sustainable Urban Dwelling Unit (SUDU)  
The SUDU project is a research initiative between EiABC in Addis Ababa and ETH Zurich. The work on SUDU was carried out using laboratory methodologies to test and initiate alternative housing strategies in Ethiopia which address the requirements as well as the  limitations of a developing territory.
The Sustainable Urban Dwelling Unit project is a co-operative research initiative launched between the Ethiopian Institute of Architecture, Building Construction and City Development (EiABC) in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, and the Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) in Zurich, Switzerland. The work on SUDU was carried out using laboratory methodologies to test and initiate alternative housing strategies in Ethiopia which address the requirements as well as the limitations of a developing territory. It represents the first stage in a complete series of full-scale housing typologies that were erected in the meantime at the campus of EiABC and in the Ethiopian countryside as part of an ongoing research entitled Urban Laboratory ETHiopia. The exploration is perceived as a response to the onerous housing conditions in the city of Addis Ababa, where more than 80% of inhabitants live in poverty. The housing shortage in Addis Ababa and other cities in Ethiopia is a result of an immense population growth over the past few decades and increased migration rates from rural to urban areas. The current housing requirement in Addis Ababa is estimated to be more than five hundred thousand units. Ethiopia currently lacks a strong and robust urban housing concept which addresses the incredible housing shortage and overwhelming poverty rate of its inhabitants. In recent years, the country has witnessed numerous experiments addressing this concern, ranging from imported pre-fabricated housing models from Europe to industrialized housing strategies and immense building programs. However, most of these neglected the economical, ecological, cultural and social setting of Ethiopia; a developing territory with limited access to standardized building materials, not to mention limited energy resources to run machineries and production plants. At its inception, the SUDU project postulated only to use locally available building materials in order to break away from an ever-growing dependency of imported goods in Ethiopia. As a result, the vast majority of the building could be realized using soil and natural stone. More than 30 local workers and scholars could be trained in techniques using these materials at only a fraction of the price compared to regular structural concrete frames. This publication documents the ideas, trials, failures and results of the research activities of the co-operating parties.