  Activists versus Captured Regulators  
We analyze the consequences of activism in a regulated industry where the regulator has been captured by the industry.
Activists are not like conventional economic agents in the realm of mechanism design. For ideological, behavioral or reputational reasons, activist groups are committed to reject any compromise. They feel entrusted with a mission, and thus are insensitive to monetary transfers. Yet, activists may be less well informed than regulators and their actions generate dead-weight costs. We find that activism may still increase social welfare because it disciplines captured regulators and reduces the social cost of imperfect regulatory systems. The view that benevolent, expert regulators act in the best interests of uninformed and defenseless stakeholders (consumers, investors or taxpayers) is now largely obsolete. The picture offered by our paper incorporates two new elements that fit well with the current behavior of modern economic agents. First it is almost impossible to subtract regulators from the influence of the industry they are supposed to monitor. The stakes of regulation have become too large and regulatory agencies lack the resources that are needed to compete with the private sector for hiring experts. Second, even if individual stakeholders still lack the time, resources and expertise to evaluate increasingly more complex projects, modern technologies have triggered the emergence of benevolent "experts" in the Internet community. Provided the relevant data are made publicly available, benevolent experts may spontaneously spend the time and energy necessary to deeply examine and digest these data and provide independent assessments to the general public. Like the Wikipedia phenomenon, these assessments can reveal extremely useful, provided inaccurate or biased assessments can be detected and eliminated. It is to be hoped that such independent assessments, combined with credible threats of corrective actions by agents like NGOs may induce existing regulatory systems to enhance their performance.