  Iron biofortification of rice for improving human health and nutrition 
Biofortification is now identified as one of the most effective strategies to alleviate micronutrient malnutrition, for example, iron deficiency. We use novel strategies to increase iron content in the rice endosperm to dietary sufficient levels for humans.
Rice is a staple food for nearly half of the worldSs population, but it contains very low levels of bioavailable micronutrients (such as iron) for a balanced human diet. Thus, micronutrient malnutrition is a serious consequence among people solely dependent on rice for their sustenance, and iron deficiency anemia is a serious global health challenge. Biofortification is currently one of the most effective strategies to alleviate iron deficiency, but it has proven difficult to increase iron content in rice grains by conventional breeding. Previously, our research group reported rice lines (NFP lines) with increased iron content in polished grains, by more than six fold, through the concerted expression of genes involved in iron transport and storage. Despite this success, further efforts are required to achieve the target of daily recommended dietary iron levels (8-18mg/day; 30mg/day for pregnant women). We currently evaluate the role of a modified iron-regulated transporter that selectively transports Fe2+ but has lost the capacity for transport of toxic cadmium, to acheive this goal. Our novel design and combination of genes, that we test, is expected to allow effective iron uptake from the soil, transport within the plant and storage in the rice grain while avoiding uptake of toxic cadmium at the same time. Our project is complementary to Golden Rice, which was developed at ETH to alleviate provitamin A deficiency. In the near future, the high-iron and Golden Rice traits, either as separate varieties or combined in a single new variety, will make an enormous contribution to human health by improving the two most serious nutritional deficiencies in the human population, especially in developing countries.