  Systematic quantitative analysis and modeling of the endocytic membrane system in mammalian cells 
The endocytic membrane system consists of a variety of entry routes and  organelles. Endocytosis is the prime cellular system used by many pathogens. To understand the complex endocytic system in mammalian cells, realistic computer simulations are needed.
The endocytic membrane system consists of a variety of entry routes and organelles, mechanisms of vesicle formation and cargo sorting, and a wide range of trafficking kinetics. This intricate dynamic network is designed to provide cells with the necessary spatial and kinetic backbone for complex information processing, and for translation of this information to the correct physiological output. Moreover, endocytosis is the prime cellular system used by many pathogens, including toxins, viruses, and intracellular bacteria. To understand the complex endocytic system in mammalian cells, realistic computer simulations are needed. To reach this goal, we will perform systematic perturbation studies of the endocytic membrane system with high-resolution light microscopy. New image processing and object detection algorithms, combined with novel machine learning methods, will be applied to identify quantitative parameters for classification, and to extract the physical properties of endocytic organelles and trafficking dynamics. The obtained large sets of characteristic parameters, describing endocytic phenotypes and their dynamic behavior, will be used to determine three-dimensional vector fields of the motion of organelles and vesicles that constitute trafficking networks in space and time. In parallel, we will integrate these data with large datasets of genetic, physical, and metabolic interactions in order to identify the interplay among the functional modules and molecular machineries that mediate vesicle traffic and cargo sorting. Ultimately, our aim is to formulate and numerically simulate integrative spatio-temporal models of the membrane trafficking network, enabling predictions of the collective behavior of the endocytic membrane system.