  INFRARISK - Novel indicators for identifying critical INFRAstructure at RISK from natural hazards 
Within the INFRARISK project, reliable stress tests to establish the resilience of critical European infrastructures to rare low frequency extreme events will be developed. It  aids decision making in the long term regarding robust infrastructure development and protection of existing infrastructure.
Extreme natural hazard events such as earthquakes, landslides, tsunamis, river floods, winter storms and coastal phenomena, have threatened and damaged many different regions across Europe and worldwide. These events, whilst being extremely rare, can have a devastating impact on critical infrastructure systems. The INFRARISK vision is to develop reliable stress tests to establish the resilience of critical European infrastructures to rare low frequency extreme events and to aid decision making in the long term regarding robust infrastructure development and protection of existing infrastructure. This will be achieved through developing an operational analysis framework that considers the impact of individual hazards on specific infrastructure systems and the cou-pled interdependencies of critical infrastructure, addressing the complexity of known unknowns and unknown un-knowns scenarios through robust risk and uncertainty modelling. The framework will consider cascading hazards, cascading effects and time dependent vulnerability with the ultimate objective of developing practical software tools and benchmark guidelines that provide support to European infrastructure managers in assessing the probabil-ity of occurrence of extreme rare events and assessing the vulnerability of critical infrastructure. This will enable infrastructure managers to minimise the impact of extreme events by providing them with the necessary tools to develop robust mitigation and response strategies. INFRASRISK will establish a means of cross-European collabo-ration, supported by the necessary tools and methodologies, where relevant stakeholders can share data, results of model simulations, and environmental services in a seamless, efficient, and effective way. The objectives of IN-FRARISK will be achieved through a carefully selected consortium formed of experts in hazard identification, complex risk analysis and uncertainty modelling, operational analysis, implementation strategies, infrastructure management and engineering design and assessment. While the focus of the project is aligned to transport infra-structure, it is envisaged the framework developed will be transferrable to any critical infrastructure system or sys-tems of systems for interdependnant networks.