  Genetics and Enzymology of Monooxygenases  

 Oxygenases introduce one or two oxygen atoms in their substrates, and play a major role in the biodegradation of aliphatic and aromatic compounds by making the compound accessible for further metabolic steps. As these reactions are difficult to perform by classical chemistry, oxygenases show great promise for application in biocatalytic processes. Because oxygenases are usually cofactor-dependent, multi-component enzyme systems, they are easiest applied in living cells that regenerate catalyst and cofactor at the same time. However, for several reasons, such as pathogenicity, low expression levels and through-conversion of the desired product, use of the original host strain may not be possible. Therefore, the oxygenase systems must be cloned and expressed in a suitable host strain. The application of oxygenase clone libraries speeds up the screening process, because expression levels can be controlled, and through-conversion is abolished. In addition, a preselection for the desired activity can be performed. As few oxygenases are well characterized, cloning of new members of specific classes of oxygenases also aids the structure-function studies of these enzymes by sequence analysis and comparisons. We have selected the non-heme iron membrane monooxygenases for these studies as they are excellent tools for stereo- and regioselective hydroxylation, epoxidation, sulfoxidation and demethylation reactions. The genetics, biochemistry and structure of a prototype system, the alkane hydroxylase of Pseudomonas putida (oleovorans) GPo1, is studied in great detail (in collaboration with Prof. Ehud Landau). In addition, novel alkane hydroxylases are cloned from a wide range of Gram-positive and Gram-negative organisms (including biotechnologically interesting strains) using a PCR approach with degenerate primers. Heterologous expression of the cloned genes helps us to investigate substrate uptake, substrate specificity as a function of the environment (host), and stability and activity of the alkane hydroxylase components. In the same manner, we are now approaching the NADPH/FAD-dependent Baeyer-Villiger monooxygenases, a useful but little studied class of enzymes.