  Continuous target based planning  
Ein wichtiger Aspekt bei der Erstellung von Modellen für die Verkehrsplanung ist die Frage nach dem Bedarf an Bewegung in dem Model. Verwendet man ein mikroskopisches Modell, bei dem einzelne Personen durch sogenannte Agenten repräsentiert werden, so  lässt sich diese Nachfrage intuitiv...
Travel demand generation has a very important role in transport modeling as it represents the part of a simulation that fills the system with life. In microscopic models, one has the advantage that travel demand can be generated in a intuitive way: People are modeled directly as agents and consequently, the behavior of these can be modeled on an individual basis. Current large-scale agent-based integrated demand models belong to the class of random utility models and use a utility maximization scheme to generate complete activity plans for each agent. These plans are then used in traffic flow simulations. The results from the traffic flow simulation include congestion patterns and time-of-day-dependent travel times. The basic logic behind the utility maximization procedure employed is to assume that agents' behavior is completely rational and globally optimal. As a result, these models can be used to compute the stochastic user equilibrium (SUE). The utility-maximization approach has also its drawbacks: With current utility functions, generated activity patterns tend to drift far away from statistics found in survey data irrespective of the initialization used. The final patterns show far more activities executed than desired/observed. Recently, need-based theory showed one way out of the problem: By modeling the needs of each person, executing an activity only makes sense if the corresponding need has already built up. Consequently, instant re-execution of the same activity will not yield any further gain to the agent. In our previous project, the need-based approach was adapted to include activity duration and location choice. Furthermore, the model was extended to take various constraints into account. Most importantly, the model is able to respect generalized opening hours (e. g. shop hours) and to look ahead and avoid, for example, an empty fridge during long weekends. The resulting activity plans fit the observed data reasonably well and show desired weekly rhythms and even special behavior in situations like holidays. Unfortunately, the model is effectively limited to problems that can be described with needs. For example, it is difficult to handle activities where only activity frequency (and not execution duration) is relevant (e. g. check mail box), as it is hard to map that to need build up rates and satisfaction rates. To solve this problem and increase the model's flexibility, we propose a target based planning approach. The idea is to base activity execution on statistics that are constantly updated as an agent performs activities over time. These statistics can e. g. compute the accumulated execution time of an activity type over the last 3 day, or track the number of times a certain activity was executed during the last month, respectively. Simply put, the behavioral rule implemented is to compare the current value of a statistic to a target value (usually obtained from observed data). The algorithm then triggers actions to reduce the difference between current and target value. The advantage of this generalization of the need-based approach is the clear relationship between parameter values and their effect on agent behavior. Furthermore, the model is extended by projects: During a project the behavior of an agent differs, often substantially, from the behavior during another project. This change is effective for a certain period. Projects can be nested, and they act on the set of currently active targets. The proposed model is capable of simulating the activity planning process over prolonged periods efficiently. To make this property usable, an important part of the project will deal with the compilation of a 365-day scenario. This scenario will encompass everything from seasonal effects, weather dependence, vacations, and holidays. The results obtained from running such long scenario consists of yearly profiles of a great variety c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> of state variables. Possible applications include the design of road networks reliable also during emergency situations or capable of dealing with demand peaks during e. g. the vacation season. Better water and energy management can also be envisaged as it is possible to extract relevant usage patterns of any resource related to activity execution from the simulated behavior. Using the 365-day scenario, it will also be possible to learn about seasonal effects in household economics and its interaction with e. g. tourism.