  Energy Management for the Monte Rosa Hut  
This research project aims at developing new algorithms and software and hardware solutions for the optimal management of energy and waste flows in buildings. The new Monte Rosa hut is used as a benchmark and demonstrator object. The main goal is to achieve a high energy autarchy. 
This research project aims at developing new algorithms and software and hardware solutions for the optimal management of enery and material flows in buildings. The new Monte Rosa hut is used as a benchmark and demonstrator object. The main goal is to achieve a high energy autarchy. The key idea is to optimize the interactions of the different available energy sources, storages and consumers. Forecasts predicting the weather and the occupancy will be instrumental to achieve that goal. In recent years substantial research for decreasing the energy consumption of hybrid engine and propulsion systems has been made. Less efforts have been invested in buildings, although there is a substantial potential for improvement in such systems as well. The single components used in buildings are extensively optimized in their function. Therefore, additional energy savings can often be achieved if the interaction of the several components is optimized also in transient conditions. The goal of this project is to develop methods and tools allowing the optimization of the energy and material flows in modern buildings. Forecasts of external influences (e.g. weather, occupancy, energy costs, etc.) are key information that are often available. Another important piece on information are mathematical models of the building systems, which permit to predict, and therefore optimize, its behavior. With such a model-predictive control approach and apropriate IT systems, all energy sources, storages and users in buildings can be coordinated in an optimal way. The new Monte Rosa hut is used for practical tests of these ideas. The reasons for this choice are: T ¸ the scientific and technical challenges; T ¸ the extreme climatic conditions bringing the system to its limits, such that useful experiences for less challenging applications are obtained; and T ¸ the great visibility and outreach of this project with which this project will strengthen SwitzerlandSs role as a pioneer in new energy technologies. This project is well linked with other energy-related initiatives of ETH and its industrial and academic partners and, thus, uses the resulting synergies.