  Model-based Control of Three-way Catalytic Converters  
Model-based control strategies of a three-way catalytic converters (TWC) are investigated. The focus lies on high conversion efficiencies during transients and optimal oxygen depletion after drag phases. 
Introduction Three-way catalysts are today's most successful aftertreatment concept for port-injected gasoline engines. Conversion rates of over 98% are reached if the exhaust gases exiting the engine are kept within a narrow band around stoichiometric conditions. However, during transient operation of the engine, which occurs during a typical driving cycle, short deviations to the rich or to the lean side cannot be avoided by the lambda control system. As long as the oxygen storage of the catalyst is neither completely oxidized nor completely reduced, these deviations can be compensated by the three-way catalyst. But this is not always the case: During the drag phases of a driving cycle, no fuel is injected and the exhaust gas is very lean. This leads to a complete filling of the oxygen storage. Once the injection is started again, the catalyst will not be ready to compensate for deviations in the air-to-fuel ratio. In order to avoid NOx emissions, the catalyst first needs to be partly depleted using rich exhaust gas. In the past years, a deep understanding of how oxygen is stored and released in catalysts has been developed. This knowledge is now applied to design model-based TWC controllers. Better controllers make the use of smaller catalysts possible, thereby reducing cost and providing faster light-off on cold starts. In this context, especially the observation of the oxygen filling level is of major importance, since it doesnSt correlate to any sensor signal. A complex chemical model is simplified and verified with measurements on the engine test bench. This model is then used to develop first model-based controllers that account for the oxygen storage level of the catalyst. The controllers are also tested on the engine test bench with synthetic driving trajectories especially including drag phases. Project Goals A major part of the NOx emissions measured during a driving cycle stem from conversion breakdowns occurring once the catalyst's oxygen storage is filled up. A model of three-way catalyst has been developed, which can accurately predict NOx break through events. Based on this model new feed-forward and feedback control strategies will be evaluated, which are designed to lower the number of NOx breakthroughs, while avoiding a higher level of CO emissions. Experimental Facilities Measurements and experiments are performed on dynamic engine test bench equipped with an VW 5-cylinder 2.5L SI engine. The complete engine control system is implemented on a dSPACE system, which allows full control over all parameters, controller loops, etc. Apart from synthetic excitations of the desired inputs, emulated driving cycles can be measured as well. For the exhaust gas analysis highly dynamic analyzers for the measurement of H2, O2, NO, HC, CO, CO2, H2O and N2 are installed. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2>