  Elaboration of East-West Market Development Strategies for Intermodal Transport  

The economic development in Eastern Europe is influenced by the EU enlargement (since May 2004) not only for countries joining but also for potential members (Romania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia) and the GUS. Because of the accelerated economic growth, enormous mobility, economic and logistic needs are certain. For thus, major service providers focus on these eastern states. The combined traffic and the road network in Eastern Europe are poorly developed. Significant economic growth and expanded traffic volumes will cause major problems for sure. Logistic bottlenecks are expected. For this reason, the IVT was asked by Danzas to assess the technical settings and the legal condition, additionally it was asked to focus on strategies for successful intermodal transport between Eastern and Western Europe. First, market areas will be determined by analysing various indicators. These areas can consist of counties up to different nations. Second, promising corridors will be identified based on geographical and transport logistics considerations. The basic stettings of the legal framework, market and infrastructure conditions will be summarised. Areas and markets, which obviously cannot grow, will be sorted out. This allows a very detailed analysis of the most promising areas and a custom made proposal for the corridors. Taking the EU white paper DTime to decideS ¸ and the characteristic of the combined transport as starting points, different business strategies are developed. The strategies for each corridor discuss market, product and business strategy. The market strategy will determine which goods are of interest for certain areas. Whereas the product strategy indicates which goods are to gain market share. The business strategy defines possible business plans. The strategies are used to remove unpromising markets. These strategies apply to the defined corridors. Last but not least, the different strategies will be evaluated to derive detailed recommendations for each corridor. Projektberichte im Berichtsjahr Wichser J, St. Besters, B. Bojanic und U. Weidmann (2004) Marketing Strategies and their Implementation for more Intermodal Transport betwen East and West Europe, Work Packages 1 and 2.