  Seismology with GPS: Mapping the EarthSs interiors with geodetic observations  
We will 1) build a database of GPS waveforms that will be made available  and merged with existing seismic datasets, 2) complete a global tomography using GPS records based on nonlinear waveform inversion.
~ Comparison of tomography results consistently shows that, while the large-scale (1000 km or more) pattern of Earth heterogeneity is fairly well established (with significant uncertainty on heterogeneity amplitude), small- to intermediate-scale features of tomographic maps are strongly methodology- and/or data-dependent. Finite-frequency tomography certainly enhances resolution (Peter et al., 2009), but the improvement is small compared to the discrepancies between recently published results (e.g., Boschi et al., 2007, 2008). The nonuniformity in the distribution of seismic instruments (and events) is an important limiting factor for global resolution. We propose here to use GPS networks to increase the number of sites where seismic waves are detected and to be used for tomographic inversions, especially in the range of resolution at which tomographic models tend to disagree. Nowadays, GPS networks are expanding faster than the network of broadband seismometers (STS1 or STS-2. Indeed, almost 10.000 GPS receivers are recording data at 15s-intervals around the Earth. 100+ receivers are recording data at 1Hz. 100+ stations are streaming data in Real-Time (RT). The reasons for this quick expansion are the price of receivers, their low maintenance, and the wide range of activities they can be used for (transport, science, public apps, etc.). This large and sometimes dense network will help improving the coverage issue in some areas (North America, but also Africa, Siberia). We propose to supplement the existing seismic dataset by increasing the bandwidth of the records from 100-300 s to 1000s+. The expansion of the periods covered will allow to better constrain the properties of the upper- and mid-mantle. However, before inverting GPS data with seismic datasets, we need to address computational challenges. We provide in this proposal step stones that will pave the way to GPS tomography and develop first 3D mantle models based on satellite data in a frequency range that previously received little tomographic attention. PhD students will 1) build a database of GPS waveforms that will be made available and merged with existing seismic datasets, 2) complete a global tomography using GPS records based on nonlinear waveform inversion.