  Development of an Assessment System for Biogas Plants - 'Quality Certificate Biogas'  
This project aims at developing an assessment system for biogas production from energy crops, which is based on detailed plant data for Austria and the use of efficient production frontier benchmarking (here: using Data Envelopment Analysis; DEA). The goal is to develop a quality label biogas.
Goals tries to help avoiding The project SDevelopment ¸ of an Assessment System for Biogas PlantsT sub-optimal paths in the field of biogas technology diffusion that are common during the introduction phase of new technologies. To achieve this goal detailed data on biogas plants in Austria are collected. The data are then used for a quality assessment system that is based on Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA), a popular method to evaluate the relative production efficiency of specific plants based on a productivity frontier formed by the most efficient plants. The assessment system should clearly define all the steps involved in the production chain of biogas from energy crops, with suitable parameters that can be used for an effective characterization and objective comparison of all available processes and biogas plants, respectively. In the medium term, this benchmarking should help to establish a quality label for biogas plants (SGütesiegel ¸ BiogasT) that will determine quality standards as an orientation for the market. For the information transfer to practice, it will be necessary to involve all relevant institutions, projects, networks, and actors. The planned reNet platform biogas (Renewable Energy Network Austria; www.renet.at) should use the already existing, but so far fragmentary information network of interested parties and develop it into an independent institution (i.e. a center for testing, evaluating, and consulting biogas plants). One of the main goals of the project is that this independent center will be self-sustained. Scope The extraction of biogas from energy crops comprises several scientific disciplines: agricultural technology, biotechnology, process engineering, energy economics, and agricultural economics. The complex task of developing an assessment system for biogas plants will therefore be addressed in connection with other projects dealing with biogas. Basic process engineering and structural problems are tackled in the 19 subprojects that form where all the prior problems concerning the part of the SRenewable ¸ Energy Network AustriaT, fermentation of energy crops will be handled in relation with three newly constructed, large scale demonstration plants in Lower Austria (Reidling), Burgenland (Strem), and Styria (Hartberg). Lea- c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> ding research institutes and companies are participating in this effort. Further data will be provided through dissertations at the University of Natural Resources and Applied Life Sciences (BOKU) and in the course of this project. Also, already existing specific data sets resulting from earlier targeted investigations and projects in this field will be taken into account. (www.cropgen.soton.ac.uk) a European research consortium deals In the EU project SCROPGEN ¸ T with the specific fundamentals of the procedural steps for crop fermentation in the laboratory, in pilot projects, and in practice. In addition the international (EU) research projects SAMONCO ¸ T as well as several national projects (funded by BMLFUW, OeWAV, and the and SENERDEC ¸ T federal province of Vienna) conduct basic works concerning process engineering. The necessary systematic acquisition of data characterizing the processes of existing and plan ned biogas plants is the issue of the already established international biogas networks SADNett2 ¸ T, SBFC-Net and SIEA Biogas and Landfill GasT. Besides, numerous SBIOEXELL ¸ T, ¸ T, ¸ Task 37 U informal contacts to operators, construction companies, and planners of biogas plants exist. Furthermore, a project on behalf of the Austrian Federal Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, Environment and Water Management (BMLFUW) and the federal province of Upper Austria is concerned with a specific monitoring program of biogas plants in Upper Austria. The works of this project concentrate primarily on the design of an assessment system for biogas plants. First the technical, economic, ecological, and social parameters significant for the characterization of biogas plants have to be identified. These parameters, after defining certain minimum requirements, enter the benchmarking study in order to enable a rapid assessment of the relative performance and quality of all the process steps involved in a biogas plant. On the basis of these benchmarks a quality label biogas production from energy crops should be developed and introduced in Austria in the medium term. Project organization The project is organized in eight different work packages: WP 1: Identification of relevant parameters for a comprehensive characterization of biogas plants WP 2: Systematic collection of process-characteristic data from existing biogas plants WP 3: Benchmarking of biogas plants by means of Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) WP 4: Creation and release of a biogas quality label for successful biogas plants WP 5: Development of a center for testing, evaluation, and consultation of biogas plants WP 6: Information transfer for improvements in biogas plant operation WP 7: Information campaign for biogas recovery from energy crops WP 8: Involvement of the reNet (Renewable Energy Network) platform biogas