  SAVUCA: Southern African Value Added Cassava: Next-generation cassava with enhanced agronomic and industrial performances for southern Africa  
We propose in this research to expand existing RNA-mediated technologies to explore novel and combinatorial approaches, such as multiple trait transgenes; peptide aptamers and stacked hairpin constructs; and tasiRNAs to induce resistance to cassava-infecting geminiviruses (CGMs) and ipomoviruses. 
We propose in this research to expand existing RNA-mediated technologies to explore novel and combinatorial approaches, such as multiple trait transgenes; peptide aptamers and stacked hairpin constructs; and tasiRNAs to induce resistance in cassava plants to cassava-infecting geminiviruses (CGMs) and ipomoviruses. Hairpin constructs targeting the combined conserved regions of the replication-associated protein (AC1) sequences from the three CGMs and the Cassava brown streak virus (CBSV) coat protein (CP) sequence, previously demonstrated to confer high resistance to CBSVs at ETHZ, will be evaluated. Furthermore, the aim of this research is to test a multiple transgene hairpin construct comprising the AC1/AC4 overlapping region of ACMV, the AC1/IR of EACMV and the AC1/IR of SACMV for robust resistance in the South African industry-preferred elite cultivar T200. Transgenic cassava over-expressing a peptide aptamer in combination with an hairpin RNA targeting a conserved region of the ACMV AC1 sequence have been generated at ETHZ, and resistance against the three CGMs, SACMV, EACMV and ACMV, will be evaluated. Based on work at ETHZ that has already demonstrated that Arabidopsis miR173 under the constitutive 35S promoter can be expressed and processed in cassava, MicroRNA induced gene silencing (MIGS) targeting sequences of AC1 from the three CGMs and CBSV CP will be tested in transgenic cassava. All three strategies (i.e. multiple transgene hairpin, single hairpin and peptide aptamer, MIGS) will be evaluated and compared to select the most robust approach to confer broad spectrum resistance to cassava-infecting viruses. In parallel, we propose to investigate and increase starch content in cassava, for application in the industrial arena. We will develop RNA-mediated targeting of UMP synthase or plastidial adenylate kinase orthologs in cassava in order to determine whether this will increase starch content. Each of these genes will be tested separately and then combined into a single transgene. Down-regulation of the expression of plastidial adenylate kinase in potato has been shown to increase starch content of potato tubers, while elevating UDP levels would allow greater rates of sucrose catabolism and hence starch synthesis. We have identified cassava orthologs for UMP synthase and plastidial adenylate kinase which will be targeted for downregulation. Antisense or hairpin RNA expression will be evaluated in transgenic cassava cultivar T200. Once evaluation of these two genes is successfully completed, this trait will be stacked into a single multiple transgene targeting CGMs and CBSVs. Furthermore, we have collaborative experts (Prof. Sam Zeeman, ETHZ, Switzerland and Prof. Jens Kossmann, University of Stellenbosch, SA) in starch metabolism and manipulation within the Swiss-South African Joint Research Programme (SSAJRP). Knowledge on starch biosynthesis and downregulation in cassava will offer a means to regulate starch content to benefit industrial applications, and thereby contribute to economic growth and empowerment in the southern African region. Furthermore, transgenic lines with stacked starch and virus resistance traits will be enormously valuable to commercial and small-scale farmers. Since one of the goals of the current existing collaboration between ETH Zurich and WITS University has been to establish a high-throughput transformation biotechnology platform in SA, this joint research proposal also aims to strengthen capacity and skills in cassava trait manipulation through the research objectives, and to develop standard operating procedures for virus inoculation and screening methods, specifically to evaluate grafting to test for robust and durable resistance to cassava mosaic disease (CMD) and cassava brown streak disease (CBSD) viruses in the greenhouse, and ultimately in the field. In collaboration with government and industry stakeholders, this research project will also pave the c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> way towards developing a regulatory and commercialization roadmap for field trials of GM cassava in South Africa during the 3 years of this proposal, in order to ensure that successful transgenic cassava can be evaluated in field trials in the future.