  Practical Relevance of Scientific Theories 

 The project aims to answer the question how scientific theories gain and lose in relevance for practical life. Practical relevance is thereby not thought to be a static attribute of a theory but an anthropological perspective on a theory. Moreover, change and heterogeneity are inherent to the concept of relevance. That is to say that scientific theories gain and lose in practical relevance over time (dynamic aspect) and that the reasons for which a scientific theory gains in relevance cannot be reduced to a single criterion (heterogeneous aspect), e.g. utility. Therefore, the project aims not to reason a specific criterion assessing practical relevance but to focus on the process of relevance assessment. It is stated that this process of relevance assessment takes place in the assessing instance by means of a specific learning functioning that meets the requirements of the concept of practical relevance. Therefore, no a priori criteria need to be revealed but it is sufficient to analyse the structure that enables the assessing instance to reach a decision concerning practical relevance meaning that a connectionist learning functioning takes care of these decisions. The advantage of this specific methodological approach lies in its explanatory power of the phenomenon of gain and loss in practical relevance. A connectionist learning functioning meets the requirements of gain and loss in practical relevance because learning represents permanent change (dynamic aspect of relevance) and connectionism allows the integration of heterogeneity (heterogeneous aspect of relevance). Both connectionism and learning can best be described in the theoretical framework of artificial neural networks because they exemplify these significant aspects. In addition, learning in artificial neural networks points out the anthropological perspective by explicitly referring to an anthropological structure. In the course of the considerations it may become clear that relevance assessment can only take place if the assessing instance holds a connectionist learning functioning. Thus, the project goes beyond a mere descriptive approach as it is pursued in psychological learning theories by stating a distinctive kind of normativity for the assessing instance. To sum up, the two main steps of the project are: First, to describe the connectionist learning functioning in artificial neural networks concerning aspects of gain and loss in practical relevance. Secondly, to analyse the specific kind of normativity that results from this description for the assessing instance. According to this, the project can be grasped as a combined descriptive and normative approach that employs no ontological or transcendental but first of all epistemological deliberations with normative consequences for the epistemological instance.