  Adaptive designs for uncertainty quantification in computational dosimetry  
This project aims at developing uncertainty quantification in computational dosimetry. Active learning methods for an adaptive construction of the experimental design (ED) are investigated, together with local error estimates, which help refine the ED for specific tasks, e.g. computing quantiles.
Context: Uncertainty is ubiquitous in the design and analysis of engineering structures and systems. Advanced methods for representing the sources of uncertainty and propagating them through computational models are necessary for designing safe and robust systems under cost constraints. In this context, polynomial chaos (PC) expansions have emerged as a powerful tool for propagating the parameter uncertainties through the computational models and solve typical questions of safety or sensitivity analysis (Swhat (Swhat ¸ is the probability of failure of the system?T) ¸ are the import ant parameters that drive the system behavior?T). Although coming from a very different prospective, numerical dosimetry in computational electromagnetism nowadays faces the same challenges as the ones mentioned above: costly computational models (e.g. FTDT analysis) are used to predict the specific absorption rate (SAR) of a human body submitted to different wave sources. In order to assess the harmlessness for a full population, body is not sufficient though. Taking into account the one single calculation using an Saverage ¸ T variability of the human morphology as well as the variability of positions is the current challenge. Polynomial chaos expansions: Among other methods, polynomial chaos expansions (PCE) have proven efficiency for estimating the variability of a model response Y (e.g. the whole body SAR that results from a FDTD analysis) when the input parameters X(e.g. morphology and members position) is variable in given ranges. The main idea is to expand the functional relationship onto a specific so-called polynomial chaos basis made of orthogonal polynomials in the input variables. The coefficients of this expansion are computed from the results of repeated evaluations of the model onto a so-called experimental design, i.e. a set of input vectors that are selected so as to cover uniformly the space of variation of the random parameters. The approach is similar to Monte Carlo simulation in the sense that the computational model is run repeatedly for a set of input vectors. The number of simulations is much smaller by the PCE approach though (typically, 100 times less than for Monte Carlo simulation). Local error estimates and adaptive learning: This research program aims at adapting statistical methods that are currently developed in mechanical and civil engineering to the uncertainty quantification in computational dosimetry. More specifically, active learning methods for an adaptive construction of the experimental design will be investigated. This requires the definition of local error estimate, which help refine the experimental design for specific tasks, e.g. computing prescribed quantiles of the output quantity of interest. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2>