  Hybrid Propulsion System - Dimensioning and Control  
Optimizating a hybrid electric powertrain differs from a conventional powertrain. In this project the hybrid electric powertrain optimization problem includes both static-  (component dimensioning) and dynamic- (energy management strategy) elements. The methods originates in optimal control theory .
The approach to determine the optimal powertrain configuration is to apply optimal control methods in order to quantify the minimum achievable fuel consumption of different configurations. To be able to use such complex and computationally expensive methods a vehicle model must be simplified without losing accuracy. In some cases of complex vehicle models a parallel computing implementation of the optimal control algorithms will be developed. Further, when the optimal configurations have been found, a thorough analysis will be done in order to explain the phenomenon that reduces fuel consumption in the considered powertrains. CURRENT WORK Two separate hybrid configurations (both with a natural aspirated gasoline engine) have been evaluated; a torque assist parallel hybrid and a full parallel hybrid (see Graphics 1: Optimal control of two different types of parallel hybrid electric vehicles). When dimensioning the electric motor, battery and combustion engine, it is only interesting to compare designs with equal performance such as power-to-weight ratio. The hybridization ratio, i.e. the amount of the power contributed by the electric path at overall maximum power, has been varied for the two configurations. The corresponding engine and motor sizes for different hybridization ratios are shown in Graphics 2: Optimal carbon dioxide emissions on a given drive cycle for different hybridization ratios. The optimal control problem is solved numerically using a dynamic programming algorithm. By using an optimal control method each configuration is compared based on its optimal performance control strategy. on a given drive cycle. Therefore no configuration will benefit from a Sbiased ¸ T The optimal control scheme for the two different configurations (with 20% hybridization) is shown in Graphics 1: Optimal control of two different types of parallel hybrid electric vehicles. Results show (Graphics 2: Optimal carbon dioxide emissions on a given drive cycle for different hybridization ratios) that a full parallel hybrid has lower fuel consumption than a similar torque assist parallel hybrid. The optimal hybridization ratio is also lower in a full parallel hybrid than in a torque assist parallel hybrid. For 20% hybrids there is a 22% reduction in CO2 emissions, driving the NEDC, when including an extra electronically controlled clutch. However, the extra clutch requires additional control systems and drivability considerations. Note that the 115 g/km of the 20% full hybrid is not even achievable using a torque assist hybrid. Note also that there will be an additional reduction in CO2 emissions of around 25% when converting the gasoline engine to a compressed natural gas engine. FURURE WORK Future work includes investigations of how fuel optimal turbocharger sizing influence the optimal hybridization ratio and the optimal energy management strategy. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2>