  Modeling of branched and crosslinked polymerization 
The aim of the project is to analyze both experimentally and by suitable models the evolution of branched/crosslinked architectures of polymers produced by the freeradical mechanism. 
Emulsion polymerization is a heterogeneous process involving reaction in an aqueous dispersion of submicron polymer particles. The colloidal polymer domain poses special constraints in terms of number of growing chains per particle (so-called compartmentalization) and maximum chain size. Such constraints becomes especially important when nonlinear chains are produced, due to branching and/or crosslinking reactions. The modeling of these systems is based on multidimensional population balances, which rigorous solution has been pursued by Monte Carlo approaches in the literature. Such methods are quite demanding from the computational viewpoint and alternative approaches, based on purely deterministic modeling or mixed stochastic-deterministic methods, are crucial to develop modeling tools of practical use. The development of similar models is the first aim of this project, with emphasis on nonlinear polymers and microgels (fully crosslinked particles). Before approaching combined methods, purely deterministic models will be introduced to characterize polymerizations of growing complexity (e.g. bulk and emulsion polymerization) to gradually approach the problem. Similar modeling approaches are also used in describing the complex physical behavior shown by unstable dispersions of nanoparticles at high volume fractions. At first, the formation of branched structures is observed, followed by the generation of a percolating network (colloidal gel). Typically, Monte-Carlo simulations are the most utilized approaches to follow the onset of gelation. However, the development of alternative and/or hybrid approaches would be advantageous for many practical applications. The different models will be validated by comparative evaluation with literature models and by comparison with experimental data. The second aim of this project will be the collection of experimental results, based on systems of industrial interest and suitable to check the prediction ability of the different models. As a further research activity also the stability of emulsions towards gelation (i.e. a phase a transition due to aggregation of the primary particles into clusters) will be analyzed both experimentally as well as through a modeling activity, mainly relying on deterministic approaches.