  Centrifugal processing of metallic liquids - a new method for development of bulk metallic glasses and studies of thermophysical properties under ultrahigh gravity  
The solidification of liquid metallic alloys under the influence of high inertial accelerations up to 100,000 g is investigated. The accelerations are produced by the rotation of metallic melts in a centrifuge capable of operating at high temperatures up to 1200 rC.
In this experimental program the solidification of liquid metallic alloys under the influence of high inertial accelerations are being investigated. These accelerations are produced by the rotation of metallic melts in a centrifuge capable of operating at high temperatures. The experiments are carried out at inertial accelerations of up to 10^5 times gravitational acceleration, and at temperatures of up to 1200 rC. The application of high inertial accelerations to liquid or liquid/solid mixtures during solidification or melting is a well established procedure in the biological and medical sciences. General phenomena observed are sedimentation, stratification, and "liquid purification". The processing of metallic liquids at high inertial accelerations is, in contrast, a largely unexplored area, mostly due to experimental difficulties that arise with the attempt to process a metallic liquid above 500 rC at high gravity. Thus the use of high inertial accelerations during the solidification of metallic liquids constitutes a new approach to the study of thermodynamics, the kinetics of crystal nucleation and growth, and liquid phase equilibria. This new method can also be used to isolate and identify deep eutectic compositions in multicomponent alloys. Primary crystals that form upon cooling during continuous centrifugation will, depending on their density, float to the sample ends, while the remaining liquid will continuously change its composition until it solidifies in a multiphase eutectic microstructure. The composition of this deep eutectic may be measured and used, according to the Turnbull criterion, for the development of new bulk metallic glasses. The latter comprise a new class of materials which show exceptional resistance to crystallization in the undercooled melt, and thus make possible fundamental studies of both the liquid state and the glass transition. These alloys are also interesting for various engineering applications. The project involves the development of a suitable experimental platform for carrying out these high-temperature centrifugation studies. Systematic investigations are being performed on binary metallic alloys in order to study phase equilibria, and on several families of multicomponent metallic alloys chosen on the basis of their tendency to form metallic glasses on solidification.