  Autonomous Airborne Wind Energy (A2WE)  
A consortium from EPFL (Jones), ETH (Smith) and FHNW (Burtscher) will develop and demonstrate autonomously controlled kites. These technologies will find application in the use of autonomous kites for large-scale electrical energy generation.
There is more than enough energy available in the wind to provide renewable power at a utility scale on a global basis. However, at the majority of accessible geographic locations, high-speed and consistent winds are only available at altitudes above which modern turbines cannot today reach, nor will they economically be able to in the future due to physical scaling limitations. A cubic relation between wind speed and power strongly motivates a new concept capable of capturing energy from faster and more consistent winds available at higher altitudes. The Autonomous Airborne Wind Energy (A2WE) project will develop a paradigm-shifting concept in which airfoils are flown at high altitudes ( 500m), transmitting mechanical power to a generator on the ground through a physical tether. This novel approach was first proposed in 1980 by Loyd and preliminary studies have indicated the potential for an extremely favorable economic situation if several technical challenges can be overcome. A2WE will target a particularly challenging requirement of such a system: fully autonomous, power-optimizing flight of an airborne generation system in variable weather conditions. Achieving this goal will require both fundamental research, as well as practical development, in the fields of dynamic modeling and identification, optimal control and mechanical and electrical design. The A2WE consortium has been assembled to undertake this highly collaborative task: - The ETH team, led by Prof. Roy Smith, have an extensive track record in aerodynamics, system modeling and identification procedures with both a strong theoretical knowledge, as well as a long history of practical application. - The EPFL team, under the direction of Prof. Colin Jones, provides expertise in control and optimization, with a strong research background in real-time optimization-based control. - The FHNW team, in the group of Prof. Heinz Burtscher, have been designing kite generation systems for three years and bring significant experience in power systems and mechanical design. The consortium will individually push the boundaries in their respective fields, while cooperating to develop a unique kite power test bench, which will be used to prove the concept of airborne power. The team has a history of positive collaboration and is the ideal group to succeed at this challenging and important research. The following deliverables are expected: c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> - Advanced modeling and identification methods for unstable systems in controlled periodic orbits, providing a concrete understanding of, and optimization models for, kite power systems. - Optimal control methods for tracking of nonlinear, unstable periodic systems, enabling fully autonomous flight in varying weather conditions. - Demonstration of an airborne wind power concept under autonomous control, including a novel launching and landing mechanism.