  Thermal creep effects on stability of steel columns in fire  
The results of the former research project show the distinctive influence of thermal creep on the cross-sectional capacity and slender column and beam-column strength in  fire. The project aims at analyzing the influence of thermal creep on the stability behavior of steel beam-columns in fire.
Background The resistance of steel columns subjected to fire is strongly influenced by the temperature-dependent cross-sectional capacity considering local buckling effects, global buckling effects and thermal creep effects. Under fire conditions, steel members without fire protection heat up quickly, primarily due to the typically high surface-to-volume ratio and the high thermal conductivity of steel. Due to elevated temperatures under fire conditions, the strength and stiffness of steel decreases rapidly. Furthermore thermal creep has to be considered for temperatures above approximately 400 rC to 500 rC. Commonly used analytical models used in fire design do not explicitly consider the effect of thermal creep on the structural stability of steel members subjected to fire. Comprehensive fundamental research on the influence of thermal creep on the cross section capacity as well as slender column and beam-column strength has not been performed so far. However, the research results achieved during a former research project as well as the few research results given in literature indicate that a comprehensive research in that important field is required for structural safety. Aim The results of the former research project show the distinctive influence of thermal creep on the cross-sectional capacity and slender column and beam-column strength in fire. The promising results and findings of the former research will be extended and generalized by performing basic research on the influence of thermal creep on the fundamental structural stability behaviour of steel columns and beam-columns subjected to fire. The research project will provide a broad knowledge on the influence of thermal creep on the cross-sectional behaviour and buckling behaviour of steel members subjected to fire. The project will provide an experimental and numerical database and analytical models for the influence of thermal creep on the cross-sectional capacity and structural behaviour of steel columns and beamcolumns subjected to fire. Procedure The procedure of the research can be summarised as follows: - To perform steady-state and transient-state tensile material coupon furnace tests to analyse the influence of thermal creep on the fundamental material behaviour of structural steel in fire. - To perform stub-column tests at elevated temperatures considering different strain rates under steady-state conditions to analyse the influence of thermal creep on the cross section capacity of steel sections subjected to compression and combined compression and bending at elevated temperatures using an electric furnace. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> - To perform slender column and beam-column tests under both steady-state and transient-state conditions to analyse the influence of thermal creep on the structural stability behaviour of steel members subjected to fire using an electric furnace. To extend the basic knowledge from tests on the influence of thermal creep on the buckling behaviour of steel members subjected to fire by performing a numerical parametric study using the finite element approach. - To develop models analytically describing the influence of thermal creep on the cross-sectional capacity and fundamental structural stability behaviour in fire.