  Sensory physiology and historical epistemology  
This project deals with the question, to what extent images and their production correspond to visual thinking as a mode of scientific reasoning.
This project deals with the question, to what extent images and their production correspond to visual thinking as a mode of scientific reasoning. That question leads back to some considerations that have been emphasized within philosophy of science in the middle of the 20th century. Whereas the logical empiricism initiated by the Vienna Circle has relied primarily on physics as the theoretically most advanced science in order to make a plausible case for the logical structure of the world and the unity of the sciences, the theory of science that has primarily followed the lead of Ludwik Fleck has looked to the physiology and psychology of the senses for support, arguing that scientific cognition is less a matter of logical principles than of accepting or breaking with certain psychologically or sociologically grounded conventions. This distinction might serve as a starting point for examining the epistemic conditions of image production in the sciences and in humanities. Of course, this philosophical distinction does not necessarily reflect the situation in the sciences themselves, but it gives way to a number of questions which emerge in this context: What is the role of experience, judgement and intuition in the age of digital images? To what extent do images lead to a shift in scientific reasoning? What does it mean for our understanding of epistemic images, if we acknowledge that they have been produced by algorithms and calculation? How would visualizations in a rational and logical context look like? What is the relationship between image production and ideas (and practices) of creativity? Could that distinction perhaps shed light on artistic images? The idea of the project would not be to revitalize a psychology of scientific image production, but to discuss these images in relation to various notions of sensory perception, visual thinking, intuition, Gestalt psychology, man-machine-interfaces etc.