  Methodological basis for comparative risk assessment in the Swiss Road Network  
Within this project a decision framework and a methodological basis for identifying the appropriate and efficient use of the limited common resources are developed, with the purpose to support assessments on how to achieve and maintain an acceptable level of safety for the Swiss road network.
The aim of this research project is to develop a decision framework, comprising a methodology to identify the appropriate and efficient use of limited common resources aiming to ensure an acceptable level of safety for the road network in Switzerland. The administration of the Swiss road network has to deal with risks from various sources as natural hazards or traffic accidents for instance. The specific characteristics of the different risks have resulted in the development of many different methodologies and approaches of risk assessment and risk management. Thus the assessed risks are not comparable among themselves, making it difficult if not impossible to assess the appropriateness of options for their reduction consistently. For comparing and evaluating the different risks, the development of a standardized methodology for risk assessment is of utmost importance. In this project, guidelines have been developed on the definition of the system and the modeling of the consequences, on the treatment of uncertainties and the aggregation of the risks. Further specifications are given on the assessment of optimal and societal acceptable decision options. Using the developed framework optimal decisions which are in coherence with societal preferences in regard to investments into life saving activities as well as existing best practices, codes and standards may be identified. To a large degree existing methods, models, data and results can be utilized within the developed framework provided they fulfill given requirements. The framework is based on the newest international achievements in risk assessment and risk acceptance.