  Electrical Resistivity of Cement Based Materials  

Corrosion of the reinforcement in concrete is associated with ionic current flow in the  "electrolyte" concrete, thus the electrical resistivity of the concrete governs to a great extent the corrosion rate. Non-destructive methods as galvanostatic pulse technique or polarization resistance measurements have shown good correlation of corrosion rate to concrete resistivity. On site measurements of the concrete resistivity might thus give an indication of the corrosion risk. In the first part of the research the dielectric properties and the resistivity of cement paste and mortar have been studied systematically ias a function of porosity (water / cement ratio, curing, age) and humidity (100% to 60%). Weight change, HF impedance spectra (10 kHz to 200 MHz), MIP porosity and pore water expression and analysis were performed. The huge set of experimental data allowed to model the resistivity of cement based materials on the basis of the percolation theory. Two parameters of this model - conductivity and volume fraction filled with pore solution - are related to the pore solution . The other two parameters, the percolation threshold and the percolation exponent, are related to the distribution of the pore solution in the cement paste matrix. In the second part of the research the application of resistivity measurements as a method for assessing the durability of the reinforcement and the relation to corrosion rate is studied in the laboratory and on site. Special attention is given to the influence of temperature on resistivity and on corrosion rate. The anodic and cathodic partial reaction of the corrosion process are studied. The research work has great impact for several fields in the corrosion of steel in concrete, the resistivity as a function of total porosity, pore size distribution and pore water composition is a key factor in the corrosion of the reinforcement in concrete. It may be used as non destructive technique to assess the corrosion risk of structures.