  Epistemology of Understanding  
This project develops explications of explanatory and of objectual understanding. Furthermore, it examines how models contribute to scientific understanding, what roles moral experts might play to achieve moral understanding, and how non-verbal symbols can figure in understanding by the arts. 
Our epistemic endeavours do not only aim at knowledge and rational belief. We also want to understand what we believe. We search for explanations of facts we know and for theories which organize our knowledge. But what does it mean to understand why some fact holds by means of an explanation (explanatory understanding)? And what does understanding some subject matter by means of a theory (objectual understanding) amount to? So far, neither in epistemology nor in philosophy of science these questions have been satisfactorily answered. In epistemology, the traditional focus on propositional knowledge has recently been challenged and there is a growing insight that understanding, rather than knowledge, is our main cognitive goal. However, epistemologists have little to say about explanations and theories and, as a result, little about what it means to understand something by means of an explanation or theory. In philosophy of science, explanations and theories are widely discussed, but rarely with respect to understanding. Often, understanding is either ignored as a subjective by-product of scientific explanation, or simply identified with having an explanation. Only recently a debate about the relation between understanding and explanation has been started. However, philosophers of science have rarely attempted to give an explication of understanding. In its main part, this project develops an explication of explanatory understanding by comparing it with different forms of knowledge. Furthermore, it argues that objectual understanding cannot be reduced to explanatory understanding and suggests an explication of objectual understanding which is based on the model of reflective equilibrium. The second part of the project is devoted to three applications. The first concerns scientific understanding and examines how models and especially computer simulations contribute to understanding. The second concerns moral understanding and discusses the roles moral experts might play if we acknowledge that moral inquiry does not only aim at knowledge how to act, but also at some more ambitious understanding. The third concerns understanding by the arts and investigates how non-verbal symbols might contribute to understanding. This project is a continuation of the project SReflective ¸ equilibrium and epistemology of understanding, record ID 24233.