  Climate Change, Economic Growth and Conflict  
This project analyzes whether and how climate change might affect conflict directly and through changes in economic performance, and the moderating role of political institutions. 
Global climate change is expected to be one of the most important challenges the international community will face in the near future. The evidence presented by scientists, in particular by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC, 2007), demonstrates that climate change is indeed occurring, that human activity has clearly contributed to the phenomenon and that it will have far reaching repercussions on ecosystems and humans alike which may ultimately fuel violent intrastate and/or interstate conflict. However, most of the existing literature on the relationship between climate change and conflict relying mainly on qualitative case studies has led to little consensus among scholars. This may reflect the absence of such a relationship in the real world. Or, and this is our view, the theoretical and methodological limitations of existing work. This project aims at identifying and filling the theoretical and methodological/empirical gaps in the existing literature in order to gain a better understanding of whether and how climate change might affect conflict directly and through changes in economic performance, and the moderating role of political institutions. To examine this politically moderated climate change-economic growth-conflict (CEC) relationship, the project combines several analyses from different disciplines, namely economics, political science, and climatology within an interdisciplinary framework. 1) Empirical Evaluation In order to test our theoretical arguments we improve on the existing literature in the following ways: a. In most of the empirical research climate change is operationalized by environmental degradation such as water scarcity, soil erosion, and land degradation. However, these effects are probably endogenous to human activity in particular to economic development and political system/instability, and consequently the causal arrow may run the other way around. Given that climate change is a global trend, which at least at the local level is beyond human control, we operationalize climate change with annual levels and annual variation in temperature and precipitation within countries to estimate the impact of climate change on economic activity/conditions. b. The empirical literature has established a strong link between economic performance and conflict. In particular, the evidence suggests that poor and/or deteriorating economic conditions increase the probability of conflict both interstate and intrastate . However, most of this literature does not adequately address the endogeneity of economic conditions to conflict. Consequently, these previous findings fail to persuasively establish and identify the causal link between economic development and conflict. Our project takes the endogeneity problem seriously by applying an instrumental variables procedure. We use the annual variation in temperature and precipitation as instruments for economic conditions in order to estimate the impact of economy on the probability of conflict. c. Climate change (temperature and precipitation) affects total economic activity through its effect on the individual components of economic activity that is its scale, composition and technology. Rather than identifying these mechanisms one-by-one and then summing them up, we opt for a more all inclusive (aggregate) and parsimonious measure, namely economic output (the level of c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> output and the growth rate of output since even small growth effects can accumulate into large income effects in the future). d. Although climate change may lead to conflict through its effect on economic activity, its effects can still be either exacerbated or mitigated by political factors such as the type of the political system and the quality of government institutions. Thus, we include political factors in our models as well as an interaction term with economic activity. Data Sources Our sample comprises all countries of the world from 1900 to 2006. Data on temperature and precipitation come from the Terrestrial Air Temperature and Precipitation: 1900-2006 Gridded Monthly Time Series (Matsuura and Willmott 2007). We use geospatial (GIS) software to aggregate temperature and precipitation data to the country-year level for the study of interstate wars and to sub-national level for the study of the intrastate conflicts; for conflict from the Correlates of War (COW) and the PRIO/Uppsala Armed Conflict Data; for economic activity from the Penn World Tables (Heston et al. 2006) and the World development Indicators (World Bank 2008); for political system from POLITY IV (Marshall and Jaggers 2004) as well as the Logic of Political Survival Data Source (Bueno de Mesquita et al. 2003). Methods We employ instrumental variables two and three stages least squares (IV-2SLS) estimation techniques and include appropriate control variables in each equation, for example trade, ethno-linguistic fractionalization, mountainous terrain, contiguity, alliances. 2. Projections and Policy Implications Ultimately, we will use the results of our research to predict how future climate change affects economic conditions and in turn conflict. To that end, we will first assess the within-sample performance of predictions based on our estimates by using goodness of prediction measures (mean squared prediction error and TheilSs U). In a second step, a climate model will be used to determine projected temperature and precipitation increases for each country and year until 2099 and then calculate marginal growth effects of these temperature and precipitation increases for each country and year. In a similar way, we will calibrate a model to examine the effects of future economic growth on conflict initiation. Our research findings have strong policy implications for policymakers interested in knowing how to peacefully cope with the effects of climate change on the likelihood of conflict. The research project will contribute to generating the scientific information on which policymakers can base their decisions. References Blomberg, Brock and Gregory D. Hess (2002) SThe ¸ temporal links between conflict and eco nomic activity,T Journal of Peace Research 46(1): 74-90. Blomberg, Brock, Gregory D. Hess and Siddharth Thacker (2006) SOn ¸ the conflict- poverty ne xus,T Economics and politics 18(3): 237-267. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 3> Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce, Alastair Smith, Randolph M. Siverson, and James D. Morrow (2003) Cambridge (Mass.): MIT Press. SThe ¸ Logic of Political SurvivalT. Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce, Alastair Smith, Randolph M. Siverson, and James D. Morrow (2003) The logic of Political Survival Data Source http://www.nyu.edu/gsas/dept/politics/data/> Buhaug, Halvard, Nils Petter Gleditsch and Ole Magnus Theisen (2008) SImplications ¸ of climate change for armed conflict,T paper presented at the World Bank Workshop on Social Dimensions of Climate Change. The World Bank, Washington D.C., 5-6 March; http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTRANETS Oxford EconoColier, Paul and Anke Hoeffler (1998) SOn ¸ economic consequences of civil war,T mic Papers 50(4): 563-573. Journal of ConColier, Paul and Anke Hoeffler (2002) SOn ¸ the incidence of civil war in Africa,T flict Resolution 46(1): 13-28. American Fearon, James D. and David D. Laitin (2003) SEthnicity, ¸ insurgency, and civil war,T Political Science Review 97(1): 75-90. Gleditsch, Nils Petter (1998) SArmed ¸ conflict and the environment: A critique of the literature,T Journal of Peace Research 35(3): 363-380. Hauge, Wench and Tanya Ellingsen (1998) SBeyond ¸ environmental scarcity: casual pathways to Journal of Peace Research 35(3): 299-317. conflict,T Hegre, Haavard and Nicholas Sambanis (2006) SSensitivity ¸ analysis of the empirical literature on civil war onset,T Journal of Conflict Resolution 50(4): 508-535. Hendrix, Cullen S. and Sarah M. Glaser (2007) STrends ¸ and triggers: Climate, climate change and civil conflict in Sub-Saharan Africa,T Political Geography 26:695-715. Hess, Gregory D. and Athanasios Orphanidis (1995) SWar ¸ politics: An economic, rational voter American Economic Review 85(4): 828-846. framework,T Heston, Alan, Robert Summers and Bettina Aten (2006) Penn World Table, Center for International Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices at the University of Pennsylvania. Homer-Dixon, Thomas F. (1991) SOn ¸ the threshold: Environmental changes as causes of acute conflict,T International Security 16(2): 76-116. Homer-Dixon, Thomas F. (1994) SEnvironmental ¸ scarcities and violent conflict: Evidence from cases,T International Security 19(1): 5-40. Marshall, Monty G., and Keith Jaggers (2004) Polity IV Project, Integrated Network for Societal Conflict Research Program and Center for International Development and Conflict Management, University of Maryland. Matsuura, Kenji and Cort Willmott (2007) Terrestrial Air Temperature and Precipitation: 19002006 Gridded Monthly Time Series, University of Delaware http:climate.geog.udel.edu/-climate/ Miguel, Edward, Shanker Satyanath and Ernest Sergenti (2004) SEconomic ¸ shocks and civil con flict: An instrumental variables approach,T Journal of Political Economy 112(4): 725-753. PRIO (2006) Armed Conflict Data http://new.prio.no/CSCW-Datasets/Data-on-Armed-Conflict/UppsalaPRIOArmed-Conflicts-Dataset/ Raleigh, Clionadh and Henrik Urdal (2007) SClimate ¸ change, environmental degradation and ar med conflict,T Political Geography 26(6): 674-694. Political GeoReuveny, Rafael (2007) SClimate ¸ change-induced migration and violent conflict,T graphy 26(6): 656-673. Sambanis, Nicholas (2001) SA ¸ review of recent advances and future directions in the quantitative literature on civil war,T Manuscript. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University. Theisen, Ole Magnus (2008) SBlood ¸ and soil? Resource scarcity and internal armed conflict revi Journal of Peace Research 45(6):801-818. sited,T World Bank (2007) World Development Indicators Online Edition. c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 4>