  Kunming, China - Training and Research Component  

Client: City of Kunming, PR China Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation, SDC Duration: December 1999 (Phase I/II) August 1996 U July 2002 (Phase II/III) January 2000 U December 2004 (Phase III/IV) August 2002 U December 2006 (Phase IV/V) January 2005 U Summary: For the last 10 years, the city and region of Kunming has been marked by rapid urban growth and a strong trend towards modernization. By 2020 the economy is expected to expand strongly and ´ population to double and to reach almost 7 mio. inhabitants. Such a pace of growth northe citySs mally leads to a situation in which issues related to society, the environment, and issues of cultural heritage are increasingly neglected. Since the beginning of their partnership in 1982, the two cities of Kunming and Zurich have established a close relationship. This has brought about a multitude of activities in the fields of tech nical and cultural exchange. Within the overall joint project DKunming Urban Development and Public Transportation Masterplan, KUDPTM, Phase IVS, ¸ the accompanying Training and Rese arch Component DEnvironmental PlanningS(Phase ¸ III) constitutes an integrated element of the but with its own project management and separate funding (SDC). It generally aims KUDPTM U not only as a sectoto strengthen and give further impetus to urban and environmental planning U and to support the planning authorities in dealing with ral, but as an integrated planning process U complex urban and environmental problems in Kunming. Especially strong support shall be given to the integration of environmental consideration into the spatial planning process. Therefore, planning tools and instruments employing state-of-the-art technology have been developped. The project is divided up into the following components: GIS-based comprehensive spatial planning (introducion of local, subregional and regional guiU ding plan approaches and methods) Introduction of new methods and approaches for monitoring and controlling urban development U Networking with Chinese Universities, planning authorities and organizations, Tongjie UniverU sity, Ministry of Construction (MoC), China Academy of Urban Planning and Design a.o. Dissemination of pilot projects in China and other Asian as well as Western countries U Output: In view of the planning results: A completed pilot example, demonstrating clearly how comprehensive, multilevel guiding planU ning could work in China and in Kunming in particular, including institutional aspects with regard to the implementation of local, subregional and regional guiding plans in the Greater Kunming Area Dissemination of the Kunming planning results at planning seminars held together with MoC in U China and at other conferences as well as through relevant publications On the level of the institutions: c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> A better understanding of the relations between land use planning, transportation, and environU mental concerns Improved institutional capacities to deal with urban management by integrating comprehensive U planning approaches Enhanced cooperation and coordination between the different authorities involved in planning U matters Contact: Institute for Spatial and Landscape Planning ETH Hönggerberg CH-8093 Zürich/Switzerland Dr. J. P. Feiner, Tel: +41 1 633 2983 e-mail: feiner@nsl.ethz.ch D. Salmerón, Tel: +41 1 633 2985 e-mail: salmeron@nsl.ethz.ch Prof. Dr. W.A. Schmid, Tel: +41 1 633 2957 e-mail: schmid@nsl.ethz.ch http://www.nsl.ethz.ch/IRL/kunming