  Search for the Higgs Boson at LEP 2  

 The existence of the Higgs particle is an essential prediction, still to be experimentally verified, of the very successful standard theory of fundamental particles. The mass of the Higgs particle is not predicted by the theory. From the non-observation of the Higgs boson at LEP 1, it has been inferred that the Higgs must weight more than 60 GeV. With the increased center of mass energy of the LEP collider, a heavier Higgs particle could be produced and detected by the LEP experiments. We have searched for the Higgs in the data collected by the L3 experiment in the summer and fall 1996, with the Lep collider running at center of mass energies between 161 and 172 GeV. We have searched for both single and pair production of Higgs particles, the latter being unequivocal evidence of physics beyond the standard theory. Events with four jets, or with jets and a lepton pair, or with jets or a lepton pair with missing energy and momentum, have been analysed, since Higgs production and decays could produce "anomalies" , not predicted by the standard theory, in the distributions of certain characteristic quantities of these events, for example the masses of the jets and of the leptons. The large signal acceptance and the very good energy as well as direction resolution for jets and leptons of the L3 detector guarantee that a Higgs signal can be efficiently identified by the detector. No "anomaly" has been detected for any characteristic distribution of the investigated channels in the data collected at the higher energies. Thus a lower limit of about 70 GeV has been set on the mass of a singly produced Higgs particle, even in the case when the Higgs decays into "invisible" particles leaving no trace in the detector (as those expected to be candidates for dark matter in the universe). A lower limit of about 55 GeV has also been set on the masses of pair produced Higgs particles, as those predicted in the minimal supersymmetric extension of the standard theory. The search for heavier Higgs particles will continue in 1997 when the center of mass energy of the LEP collider will be raised to 184 GeV and an integrated luminosity in excess of 100/pb is expected to be delivered to the experiments. The Higgs predicted by the standard theory will be detected if it is lighter than 85 GeV, while pair produced supersymmetric Higgs particles will be detected if the weigh less than 70 to 75 GeV.