  A multispecies model for silicate melts:The basis for a quantitative understanding of magmatic processes  
The objective is to construct a thermodynamic model to quantify thermochemical properties of multicomponent silicate melts based on spectroscopically identified melt species 
Quantification of processes controlling magma dynamics in the Earth' s interior is essential to understand magma-related phenomena, such as melt genesis and mobilization, magma evolution, triggers of volcanic activity, the type and potential hazard of eruptions or the formation of magmatic-hydrothermal ore deposits. Observations on natural systems are mostly limited to the final product of the magmatic history, so that detailed investigation of igneous processes requires a theoretical model to simulate melt evolution at depth. To be useful, such a model has to be applicable over a wide range of temperatures, pressures and melt compositions and include an accurate description of physical properties of melts and the solubility of volatile components. The latter is of particular importance as volatile exsolution induces the most dramatic changes in the physical properties of magmas. These challenging requirements can best be met by a thermodynamic model that describes properties of multicomponent silicate melts on the basis of a physically sound selection of chemical species from observed melt configurations at the atomic scale. This new research group was set up to develop the fundamentals for such a model using a moderately complex set of species, identified with the help of spectroscopic techniques. In addition to being applicable to a wide range of compositions, a speciation-based model renders physicochemical parameters (viscosity, conductivity, diffusivity, trace element behaviour) accessible to rigorous representation. Thermodynamic parameters will be fitted using a database compiling mineral-melt equilibrium assemblages in natural systems and experimental systems. For accurate fitting in chemically specialized melts, this database will be completed with new data, generated through our own developments in the microanalysis of melt and fluid inclusions using Laser-ablation ICP-MS and Raman spectroscopy. It is the exciting recent progress in both spectroscopic methods to reliably identify melt species and in microanalytical techniques to generate mineral-melt equilibrium data that makes the major task of developing such a model realistic.