  Coupled and competing instabilities in perovskite materials  
This project aims at elucidating the coupling and competition of instabilities in bulk perovskites as well as oxygen-rich LaTiO(3+x) layered perovskite materials by means of density functional theory calculations with the ultimate goal of designing new multiferroic materials. 
This project aims at elucidating the properties resulting from instabilities in oxygen-rich layered perovskite materials as well as the interaction between these instabilities. We will initially study compounds of the LaTiO3 family, going from the insulating four layer thick La2Ti2O7 phase (see attached figure "four-layer") to metallic phases with larger layer thicknesses such as five-layer La5Ti5O17 (see attached figure "five-layer") [1]. These materials were shown to exhibit very diverse physics such as improper ferroelectricity with a Curie temperature of around 1770K for the four-layer phase [2,3] or 1D-superconductivity for the five-layer phase [1]. After understanding the physics behind these properties it will be interesting to study the effect of partial or full cation substitutions on the B-site (Ti) with different elements - especially those adding magnetic properties such as Fe or Mn. We hope to find potential coupling to the existing polar instabilities, opening the way towards novel engineered multiferroic magneto-electric materials. Our study is based on density functional theory (DFT) using generalized gradient approximation (GGA) exchange-correlation functionals and the Hubbard U correction to adjust the position of unoccupied La f states. We perform structural relaxations and phonon calculations using the VASP code. DFT calculations using the PBEsol functional in bulk SrTiO3, predict the ferroelectric instability to be weak, in agreement with the material known to be quantum paraelectric. The ferroelectric instability is further weakened by octahedral rotations due to subtle charge redistribution, which affect the bonding. Preliminary results on the four-layered La2Ti2O7 compound indicate the presence of instabilities based both on the rotation of TiO6 octahedra as well as the off-centering of Ti atoms along this rotation axis. Due to the layering, octahedral rotations will lead to appearance of a ferroelectric polarization, the material thus having both conventional as well as rotational ferroelectric instabilities along different crystallographic directions. The conventional ferroelectric instability is however suppressed by octahedral rotations, reminiscent of the above-mentioned situation in SrTiO3. F. Lichtenberg, A. Herrnberger, K. Wiedenmann, Progress in Solid State Chemistry, 36, (2008), 253-387 S. Nanamatsu, M. Kimura, K. Doi, S. Matsushita, N. Yamada, Ferroelectrics, 8, (1974), 511-513 J. López-Pérez, J. Íñiguez, Physical Review B, 84, (2011), 075121