  Soft Ionization Mass Spectrometry for Studies of Noncovalent Interactions  
Using both matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) and electrospray ionization (ESI), we investigate noncovalent complexes of biomolecular interest in the gas phase. 
Soft ionization methods, in particular matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) and electrospray ionization (ESI), have led to a revolution in the application of mass spectrometry (MS) to study high molecular weight biological molecules, synthetic polymers, and many other classes of compounds. What is much less known but equally interesting is that soft ionization methods allow, under carefully chosen conditions, the preservation of noncovalently bound complexes and supramolecular assemblies in the gas phase. Using both MALDI and ESI, we investigate noncovalent complexes of biomolecular interest. Current projects include: (i) study of complex, real-world noncovalent interactions such as the inhibition of the endocrine receptor by small molecules that occur in the environment, so-called endicrine disruptors. (ii) Determination of binding constants by mass spectrometry. Different methods are used for this, such as ESI titration, or H/D exchange followed by MALDI readout (two novel methods called SUPREX and PLIMSTEX). We also complement these measurements with standard methods for Kd determination, such as surface plasmon resonance studies. (iii) A detailed investigation of the influence of the ESI spray on chemical equilibria in solution. Specific knowledge about how the shrinking volume of ESI droplets may influence solution phase equilibria, and how this depends on the time scale of the mass spectrometric measurement and relative to the kinetics (koff / kon) of the equilibrium considered is key for further development of methods to determine accurate binding constants by ESI. (iv) The use of covalent cross-linking chemistry to stabilize large, multiprotein complexes for direct analysis by high-mass MALDI mass spectrometry using special instrumentation For details see the electronic links given below