  Aggregation kinetics and mechanism of proteins in shear flow  
The stability of proteins with different sizes under shear in the presence of different levels of surface hydrophobicity is investigated experimentally, and the observed kinetics will be modelled based on their aggregation mechanism.
In last decades, great attention has been given to the understanding of protein aggregation. One interesting aspect of this complex problem is how shear force affects protein stability, since it is present in both intravascular body fluids as well as during the production and formulation of protein drugs. The shear force can cause protein denaturation, resulting in changes in protein structure and aggregation into oligomers and higher organized structures, thus affecting the protein drug activity and loss of therapeutic functions as well as many possible side effects (e.g. anaphylactic shock) and toxicity of the medicament. In the literature it has been shown that the shear forces induce the conformation change and the orientational order of protein molecules, hence enhancing the assembly process. However, there is a huge discrepancy on the reported results. Indeed, some proteins have been reported to be stable even in the presence of very high shear rates, whereas other proteins exhibit conformational changes and aggregation already under moderate shear. This inconsistency of the results can be explained by the simultaneous presence of shearing forces and hydrophobic surfaces. The latter is known to facilitate protein unfolding and thus enhance the aggregation process. Therefore, it is necessary to design suitable experiment to discriminate the contributions between the two factors. The objective of this project is to elucidate the role of shear force on protein stability by performing experiments under controlled conditions of surfaces and shear rate. One goal of the project is to understand the relationship between protein size (using several model proteins such as human insulin, lysozyme, bovine serum albumin and immunoglobulin G), thermodynamic stability and propensity to aggregate in shear flow in the absence and presence of hydrophobic surfaces. The experimental characterization will be carried out with Dynamic and Static Light Scattering, Chromatography, fluorescence and absorbance assays, SDS-PAGE, Circular Dichroism, electron microscopy and Atomic Force Microscopy. Obtained results will be rationalized and interpreted in the frame of Smoluchowski kinetic approach based on Population Balance Equations and Computational Fluid Dynamics.