  Schallemissionsanalyse zur Zustandserfassung von Betontragwerken / Assessment of Concrete Structures by Means of Acoustic Emission Analysis  

Acoustic emission (AE) is an established method for the testing of materials like steel or composites and it offers great opportunities for the condition assessment of reinforced concrete structures as well. This research project aims at providing a contribution to the applicability of AE analysis to the condition assessment of reinforced concrete structures. To be investigated is which of the existing analysis methods are suitable for the examination of real structures and, in particular, whether the waveform analysis allows one to deduce the nature of the damage in a concrete structure. Various experiments were carried out in order to study the AE behaviour of reinforced concrete under loading. Mechanisms such as crack formation, crack opening or loss of bond between reinforcement and concrete emitted energy in the form of body waves (AE). By measuring and analyzing the occuring AE some qualitative relations to the process of degradation within the specimen were found. Different localization programs were applied to determine the location of AE sources. The results gave reasonable agreement with expectations and observations. However, several limitations to the successful application were encountered. Aiming at the characterization and identification of different source mechanisms such as crack formation or friction, for example, the transient waveforms are now being analyzed quantitatively. The application of the moment tensor inversion allows one to eliminate these influences and yields the radiation pattern of clustered AE sources. Since computer capacity and processor speed rapidly increase, the physical relationship between AE and elastic wave propagation can be treated numerically. Presently, numerical simulations of elastic wave propagation in structural concrete are exercised and verified by physical tests. Concrete is modeled numerically as a randomly distributed medium and cracks are implemented as solid/vacuum interfaces. The source excitations, respectively the acoustic emissions, are generated due to moment tensor components. This work aims at combining a numerical concrete model with data known from physical tests and to reconstruct the emitted AE activity during crack growth.