  Redox-induced speciation changes and reductive mobilization of arsenic and iron in highly-contaminated river floodplains  
Arsenic is a highly toxic trace element which is enriched in many river floodplains due to past or current mining activities. The biogeochemical processes controlling As mobility and bioavailability in the soil are not fully understood, especially the coupling to microbial reduction of Fe and Mn. 
The alluvial floodplains of the Ogosta River in NW Bulgaria, a tributary to the lower Danube River, are highly contaminated with arsenic (As) and other trace elements as a result of historic mining activities and a large tailing dam failure in 1964. In a preliminary study, we detected As concentrations up to 47`000 mg/kg in floodplain soils, exceeding the EU guideline values for As in soils by a factor of 940. Despite the high iron (Fe) concentrations in these extremely contaminated soils, which are also a result of mining impacts, the molar As/Fe ratio in the poorly-crystalline mineral fraction of the soils (as assessed by oxalate or ascorbate extraction) was found to be anomalously high, reaching values of 0.5 in some soils. Since these poorly-crystalline Fe oxyhydroxide fractions are most bioavailable for microbial Fe reduction under anoxic conditions, the composition of this Fe and As pool will have a significant effect of the dynamics of As and Fe release from soil solids during prolonged flooding. To date, no studies have been published on the As speciation in the circum-neutral to alkaline, extremely As contaminated soils of the Ogosta river floodplain. The goals of our proposed research are to (i) provide the first detailed spectroscopic study on the speciation of As and Fe in Ogosta floodplain soils sampled along contamination gradients, (ii) characterize the distribution of As species as a function of particle size and at the micrometer scale, (iii) investigate the dynamics of As and Fe reduction and resulting Fe mineral transformations and speciation changes of As under anoxic conditions induced by soil flooding. We are particularly interested in understanding the influence of molar As/Fe ratios in the poorly-crystalline mineral fraction of soils on As and Fe reduction. We hypothesize, that very high As/Fe ratios suppress microbial Fe reduction and Fe mineral transformations. This will in turn limit As(V) reduction and release into solution. Thus, the mobility of As in extremely contaminated soils may be lower than expected based on the total elemental concentrations. The speciation of As and Fe in the Ogosta soils will be investigated by synchrotron X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy (XAFS). Micro-focused X-ray fluorescence (¸ t-XRF) and ¸ t-XAFS will be used to study the spatial distribution of As, Fe, Mn, and other elements at the micrometer using hard X-ray micro-spectroscopy will be used to visualize the disscale. SChemical ¸ imagingT tribution of major As species in the soils. The microbial reduction and subsequent release of As and Fe in the Ogosta soils will be stu Scolumn Smicrocosm died by different types of controlled laboratory experiments (Sslurry ¸ T, ¸ T, ¸ T). Overall, the results will provide essential scientific information needed to develop a sustainable river management and remediation strategy for Ogosta and similar mining-affected floodplains.