  Machine Learning approaches for freight train safety monitoring  
The aim is to provide a method for safety monitoring of trains in the SBB  network, focusing on automatically identifying wheel defects on freight trains. It is expected to provide wheel defect rankings, by extending multiple instance learning, semisupervised classification and ranking methods.
The project aims to provide a method for safety monitoring of trains in the SBB network. It focuses on automatically identifying wheel defects on freight trains based on the existing SBB infrastructure. The method is expected to provide within-class and overall wheel defect rankings. This goal involves adapting and extending current machine learning methods such as multiple instance learning, semi-supervised classification and simultaneous regression and ranking. The goals of this project are to detect defective wheels on freight trains and the category of defect, quantify the seriousness of a specific defect and rank the observed wheel defects. Early detection of serious wheel defects on freight trains are an essential part in preventing damage to the infrastructure and providing the operators of the trains timely information on necessary repairs, that can prevent further deterioration of the wheels. There exist different types of defects on train wheels, which have different consequences for the infrastructure and that show different effects on the wheel force time series. We therefore aim to first find a classification method that can predict if a wheel is defective and that can find the associated defect category. The method will use the multiple partial observations, the vertical wheel force time series, we have of a wheel. The second goal of using machine learning methods on the sensor measurements is to infer the seriousness of a wheel defect. This could be estimating the length of a wheel flat, a well described type of wheel defect, or other values for different types of defects. To achieve this goal we plan to extend the classification method for the multiple partial observations to handle the case of regression. The third part consists of generating an ordered list, a ranking, of the observed wheel defects. This ranking could then be used daily for immediate action (removing a train from operation) or in form of a weekly report to inform the operators of the freight trains of the most serious defect, s.t. wheel defects can be repaired efficiently. The goal is to prodproduce (a) individual rankings within a specific type of defect and (b) a combined ranking over all defects.