  Dark Matter Through Gravitational Lensing  
Understanding the Dark Universe with its make up of dark matter and dark energy is one of the most pressing issues in physics and cosmology today. My research focus is gravitational lensing, which is a powerful method for studying the Dark Universe.
Understanding the Dark Universe with its make up of dark matter and dark energy is one of the most pressing issues in physics and cosmology today. My research focus is gravitational lensing, which is a powerful method for studying the Dark Universe. This is due to the fact that the physics of light propagation through the Universe is simple and well understood. The main challenges for lensing are observational and, therefore, can be tackled with carefully designed experiments. My three-year research project proposed in this application is divided into two parts. The first part focuses on the large-scale properties of dark matter. This builds on my earlier work, where I used weak lensing and galaxy positions to make an empirical 3D matter density map of the COSMOS field. I plan refine such maps by adding extra information coming from other probes, including x-ray measurements, strong lensing and secondary CMB measurements. I also plan to use my new methods on the forthcoming data from the Dark Energy Survey (DES), of which I am a Full Member. The second part of the project targets small-scale dark matter structures. This is important because signatures of particles properties, such as particle mass, are most likely to be seen on these scales. Here, I will extend my existing expertise in strong lensing by first developing new statistical methods for measuring substructure and then applying these new methods to data. As part of my SNF project, I will play a key role in programs that will be needed to characterise and further understand the strong lensing systems that we expect to discover through DES. My research project is founded on access to new data. As part of the DES collaboration, my team and I will have full proprietary rights to its data. The full DES science survey will begin in the second half of 2013, and it will image 5,000 square degrees of the southern sky in 5 bands (grizY) to a depth corresponding to galaxies out to redshifts greater than one. I have also worked with the COSMOS survey, which is a two square degree survey taken with the Hubble Space. Furthermore, as I am based in Europe, I can apply for additional observation time at ESO facilities to increase the comprehensiveness of our data from this important patch of the sky. The project I am proposing here is multidisciplinary, so as to maximally exploit the science potentials of this integrated approach. The project will cover: (i) cosmology theory; (ii) statistical methods; (iii) numerical methods; and (iv) data analysis. As such, this research project consolidates and builds upon my work to date to advance our knowledge on the nature of the Universe, especially dark matter. This multi-pronged analysis of dark matter should allow us to make more informed inferences on its nature. This is especially true if dark matter particles have energies in the KeV range or undergo a decay processes. Discovering evidence for such particle properties would have wide ramifications for the standard model and physics more broadly.