  BodyPoweredSenSE: Wearable ICT for Zero Power medical Applications  
Body Powered Sense will integrate energy harvesting, power management, sensor data acquisition and processing in a portable device and apply it in two demanding and extremely relevant use cases: early prediction of AlzheimerSs Disease in the elderly and diagnosis of epilepsy in young children.
´ physiological state is required long term, during day to Increasingly the analysis of a patientSs day activities in order to precise a diagnosis or to evaluate the efficacy of an on-going treatment. ´ Wearable sensors can significantly benefit mankind. However, todaySs solutions invade the userSs normal life. The sensors require removal, replacement and reconfigurement for battery recharging and are often too large, unfriendly and difficult to use. Zero power medical devices will revolutionise sensor usage, where new software and hardware architectures will lead to more compact devices and lower power demands. Energy will be harvested from natural sources (body heat, body motion, solar) such that recharging is no longer a prime usage necessity. As a result users will experience a plug and play near transparent Sforever ¸ onT pattern and forget the fact they are wearing these sensors thereby enabling very long data capture periods not feasible today. The BPS project will support this zero power technology paradigm and c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> apply them in realistic, demanding and extremely relevant use cases: the early prediction of AlzheimerSs Disease (AD) in the elderly and the diagnosis of epilepsy (EP) in young children. The research follows a layered approach starting with the design, development and fabrication of the natural energy harvesting sources. Having integrated these into the wearable sensors the energy will undergo optimised energy conversion and storage. The sensors will leverage very low power microprocessor and sensing circuitry optimised for bio-signals and fabricated to fit into highly ergonomic devices. A new approach to energy aware software design and multi sensor integration will ensure sensors operate at maximum quality of service for a given energy profile. The sensors will include a 24 channel EEG, a three channel ECG and a novel patient environment monitor. They will interoperate on a body area network performing a multi-parametric analysis and fusion resulting in a more complex medical analysis than using three sensors separately. Using state of the art algorithms, the system will allow health care workers to more effectively diagnose AD and EP. The sensors will be tested with real patients and will be evaluated to determine their clinical and user satisfaction. Since care at home is the primary medical motivation the industrial partners will ensure a generic approach to health care at home, captured in a flexible and friendly Home software application, ´ needs at the centre of the sensorsS ´ as well as a user centred design approach putting the userSs ergonomic design.