  Use of Numerical Techniques for the Characterisation of Non-Newtonian Flows Related to Food Processing  

The fluid form of many foods during processing (e.g. chocolate, ice-cream, mayonnaise) are often fluids with non-Newtonian or viscoelastic properties. The non-linear stress-strain relationship of these fluids can increase the complexity of the flow behaviour as well as our ability to understand it. It is desirable to understand the flow behaviour since the flow kinematics, temperature, and stresses experienced by the fluid during the processing procedure greatly influence the properties, and hence quality, of the finished food product. Using numerical techniques, namely finite elements and finite volumes, we aim to simulate certain processes in order to obtain detailed information about the flow behaviour. A common flow geometry occurring in many processing procedures is the circular die-entry geometry where fluid is forced from a large tube (or reservoir) into a tube (or die) with smaller diameter. We will study the die-entry flow behaviour of a variety of non-Newtonian fluids, determining the influence of such quantities as the flow rate, the contraction ratio, and the entrance angle (abrupt or tapered contraction) on the flow behaviour. The accuracy of the numerical simulations will be verified through a limited sequence of laboratory experiments to be performed in a die-entry apparatus. During the experiments, on-line measurement techniques will be used to obtain quantitative information about the velocity field, pressure drops, and temperature profile, while visualisation of the flow patterns will provide qualitative information about the flow field, particularly the vortex enhancement. Since a major factor determining the success of the numerical simulations is how accurately the constitutive equation (which describes the fluid's stress-strain relationship) describes the rheological behaviour of the fluid, we can thus test the validity of various constitutive equations for a given fluid. This is beneficial since the current state of rheology is such that the constitutive equation is based on how the fluid behaves in only a few types of deformation (e.g. simple shear or elongation), while during processing the fluid can suffer complex deformation histories about which conventional rheology offers no information. Another flow situation arising in food processing is the extrusion of a fluid from a capillary (die). We will use numerical simulations, with some experiments for verification, to study the swell of the extruded material from capillaries of various diameter-to-length ratios and flow rates, and to evaluate the c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> ability of various constitutive equations for a given fluid to predict accurately the swell ratio. Numerical simulations will also be used to study the deformation and break-up of droplets dispersed in a fluid (continuous phase) which is undergoing a known deformation. The role of interfacial tension between the droplet and the surrounding fluid on the deformation and break-up of the particles (and the particle size distribution) will be studied. Experiments will again be used to evaluate the accuracy of the simulations.