  HeatReserves - Demand Response for Ancillary Services: Thermal Storage Control  
To account for the expected increase in renewable energy sources, we propose to use thermal loads as additional means for ancillary services. To achieve this, we will develop appropriate demand response schemes for the thermal loads.
The electricity grid has been going through drastic changes and will continue to do so in the upcoming years. One important cause of the changes originates from the strong increase of renewable energy sources, such as wind and solar, which are fluctuating and hard to predict. Since in a power grid demand and supply must be balanced at all times, the uncertainty in renewable generation increases the need for so-called ancillary services. Control reserves are the most important form of ancillary services and provide a fast reacting compensation for a power shortage or surplus in the network. Control reserves are traded in the control reserve market and are today mainly covered by conventional generators. In Switzerland, control reserves are prominently provided by hydro power plants, which pump water to high altitudes in case of power surplus and release water through turbines in case of power shortage. Although in Switzerland the electricity production of wind and solar is currently limited, the need for ancillary services is significant also here, because of the nuclear phase-out as well as business opportunities with neighboring countries with substantial renewable generation such as Germany. We propose to use thermal loads as additional means for ancillary services to account for the expected increase in renewables. To achieve this, we will develop appropriate demand response schemes for the thermal loads. One advantage of thermal loads is their ability to react locally, whereas control reserves from hydro power plants can lead to congestions in the transmission network. The increase in the number of ancillary service providers also leads to higher market liquidity. Finally, demand response can help to reduce electricity peaks. We propose two main options for providing ancillary services with thermal loads: first, control of Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning (HVAC) systems of an aggregate of several office buildings; second, control of a large number of household appliances. These two options share a number of challenges, which can be categorized as follows: Modeling and estimation: Modeling and estimation are crucial in order to provide good control performance. The challenges c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> are due to modeling the fast dynamics of buildings given their complex HVAC systems as well as uncertainty in building parameters and weather forecasts; and due to modeling a large-scale and distributed population of household appliances in the power grid and (currently) very limited measurement possibilities for household appliances. Control and communication: The models in both options are large-scale, distributed, hybrid (discrete and continuous modes of operations) and stochastic. Effective and tractable control schemes for these systems have to be developed. For office buildings the communication infrastructure is already in place (internet access of most building management systems), but privacy considerations put limitations on the information exchanged. For household appliances communication infrastructure still needs to be developed considering the trade-off between performance and investment costs. Economic considerations and user incentives: Even if all technical problems are solved, the crucial factor for a successful implementation of demand response will be whether users take part in the proposed schemes. This, to some extent, will be determined by economic incentives balancing benefits to the grid (Transmission System Operator) with potential losses or investments to the participants. To ensure user participation, we will investigate market structures, consumer behaviors and design incentives such as rewards, or lottery schemes. Demand response options for both office buildings and for household appliances will be addressed by developing appropriate methodologies, tackling the computational complexity of the large-scale aggregated systems, validating the proposed methods in large-scale simulations, and finally case study implementations. The demand response schemes developed will provide additional ancillary services to the grid while optimizing energy use of each building/household unit. To tackle the multi-disciplinary problems, the project partners provide an outstanding mixture of expertise in the relevant areas of power grids, control theory, building simulations and economics. The expected outcome of the project is guidelines for Switzerland on the methodology and costs for implementation of demand response schemes for ancillary services and incentives for user participation in the schemes.