  Amphiro Feedback Study  
The Amphiro Feedback Study examines the effect of real-time consumption information about hot water usage on heat energy usage. The projects involve more than 600 households that take place in field study. It is funded in party by ewz and the Federal Office of  Energy.
Compared to most other countries, Switzerland has abundant fresh water resources at its disposal. This may be the reason why one very important environmental issue related to its consumption is often overlooked: the energy intensity of water heating. Being almost on par with a householdSs total electricity demand, domestic tap water usage (especially in the shower and bath) accounts for a con-siderable share of our energy budget. Exemplary for Switzerland, data for the Canton Zurich shows that only 5.2% of hot water is generated by solar thermal or district heating; all other households rely on some form of fossil fuels or electrici-ty (figure 2). Despite the environmental footprint and the relevance for achieving the societiesS ambi-tious emission targets, respective water conservation campaigns are relatively rare. Probably as a consequence of the limited attention that the topic has received in the past, the major-ity of citizens does not understand the connection between hot water usage and energy consump-tion. A panel study conducted by the Bits to Energy Lab together with the Institute for Customer In-sights (FC-HSG) indicated that two thirds out of 400 representative respondents drastically underes-timated the energy needed for their shower routines; the same share was not able to relate the amount of energy to other energy consuming devices or activities (Loock and Landwehr 1/2010). The lack of awareness is problematic since energy demand in households is largely determined by consumer decisions and can easily vary by factor two or three among otherwise similar households (Dimitropoulos, 2007). Water usage in particular is subject to daily behavioral decisions, whereas electricity consumption of appliances (e.g., refrigerators) can be controlled to a much lesser extent. And yet, most behavioral energy studies and feedback campaigns solely focus on electricity. Research Questions A previous study carried out by the Bits to Energy Lab has shown the potential of behavioral saving campaigns on the example of shower water usage. In this project, users received real-time feedback on water consumption directly at the point of use. The presence of consumption data led to a decrease in demand by 6,400l and 210kWh of respective heat energy per year and household (projected to one year based on an eight-week-long experiment) (Staake et al., 2011). The abate-ment cost, if the devices were sold at a commercial price, amounted to less than 0.10 CHF per kWh. Given that about 3 million highly standardized points of installation exist in Switzerland alone, the technology is highly attractive as a cost effective means of energy conservation. While a significant effect has been demonstrated, still a number of open issues remain. Based on the project outlined in this proposal, we aim at answering the following three questions: 1) To what extent can comparisons and (implicit) competitions in households increase saving effects? c ETH Zürich, all rights reserved. Last updated: 06.08.2004 <page 2> 2) How does feedback information affect self-assessment and thereby savings? 3) How does an initial (and stated) willingness to conserve energy determine the overall saving effects? Answers to these questions shed light to a set of challenges that are also highly relevant in the con-text of smart metering infrastructures for electricity. Answering question 1 will aid the design of smart metering frontends (e.g., for in-home displays or smart metering portals); addressing question 2 will help practitioners to assess how much effort should be invested in identifying users that strongly misjudge their consumption practices; and finally, an answer to question 3 will tell us if feedback devices should be handed out only to individuals who wish to conserve energy, or if feed-back information (if presented in a suitable way) can also induce savings without stated intent. Over-all, the results will lead to improvement in the following fields: Energy conservation: T ¸ Create awareness for energy intensity of hot water heating T ¸ Increase engagement with energy and water conservation practices T ¸ Reduce energy consumption to meet Swiss climate goals Policy & practice: T ¸ Evaluate and quantify the impact of real-time feedback using simple-to-implement psychological cues T ¸ Derive direct implications and design guidelines for the improvement of smart metering infrastructures that are applicable for both heat and electricity relat-ed information systems T ¸ [If possible to include electricity data from the ewz trial] Investigate spillover or moral licensing effects between different energy conservation campaigns Academic value added: T ¸ Advance theories on social norms, visibility of behavior, and self-perception T ¸ Raise new research issues on dynamics within families The remainder of the proposal outlines related work, details the research design, indicates the expected results. Furthermore, it details the timeline, gives an overview of the participating researchers, and states the anticipated budget.