  QDaedalus, Digital Clip-on Measuring System for Total Stations  
The scope of this project is to continue to develop the measuring system QDaedalus for high precision industrial metrological applications. The existing system is regularly updated with a special focus on real-time high frequency synchronized 3D and multi-targets measurements.
QDaedalus is a measurement system developed at the Institute of Geodesy and Photogrammetry at ETH Zurich. It is composed of both, hardware and software developments. The basic idea is to replace the eye-piece of an existing total station by a CCD camera in a non-destructive way in order to measure fully automatically very accurate spatial directions to visible objects without using corner-cube targets as in standard Automatic Object Recognition (ATR). In addition to the CCD camera and the total station, the hardware is composed of a motorized focuser and a small electronic interface for hardware synchronization of several systems. The dedicated software of QDaedalus is based on a user-friendly graphical interface and controls all sensors including the total station. Furthermore it allows calibrating the system properly before starting the measurement of the targets. These measurements are based on different optical target object recognition and extraction algorithms (OTR) like template least-squares matching, center of mass operator, robust circle and ellipse matching thus allowing a fully automatic acquisition of numerous kinds of objects. The performance of the system QDaedalus in terms of capability, precision, and automation level will be outlined in a practical example of industrial metrology at the European Organization for Nuclear Research in Geneva (CERN). The experiment focuses on the determination of high-precision 3D-coordinates of accelerating components (1x4x1 meters) of a future linear particle collider. In this application, several QDaedalus systems were set up simultaneously for measuring fully automatically the spatial directions of small ceramic spheres in order to realize a micro-triangulation network. The results obtained reveal a 3D-accuracy at a level better than 10 microns. Comparisons with a commercial laser tracker and a coordinate measurement machine (CMM) are planned in order to demonstrate the performance of the system. Furthermore, thanks to the acquisition rate of the CCD camera of 60 frames per second, dynamical applications like real-time tracking of deforming and oscillating objects are envisaged.