  Flow modelling of firn-covered cold glaciers  

Cold high altitude mountain glaciers represent an important archive of the regional climate history.  We propose an investigation contributing to the knowledge of flow properties of compressible cold firn in the high accumulation areas of glaciers. In addition, and closely related to the flow properties, numerical modelling of the flow, densification and stress fields of high altitude glaciers covered with a firn layer of substantial thickness are planned. The project plans cooperative work with Swiss and Japanese activities in ice core drilling in the Swiss Alps and on Kamchatka Peninsula, Russia. Our research supports the dating and the interpretation of physical properties of the ice cores, and in return, the ice core data and logging data of the boreholes allows us to validate the flow properties of firn and the boundary conditions of the flow modelling. The research work is divided into two parts, which are closely connected and interdependent. One part includes field experiments measuring borehole deformation in firn and evaluates the obtained deformation rates in terms of a constitutive relation between firn deformation and stress. This part is closely related to the modelling part, in which the equations for flow and stress fields in the firn area of high altitude glaciers will be implemented, applying the mentioned constitutive relations. In return, the modelling results will be used for the interpretation of the measured deformation rates of boreholes by providing the necessary stress conditions in the vicinity of the boreholes. A newly designed and built caliper-inclinometer will be used for the logging of the boreholes, which are planned to be drilled on Piz Zupo, Engadin and on Colle Gnifetti by the University of Berne. In situ measurements in the borehole with the caliper-inclinometer will be carried out immediately after drilling and repeated after several months to years. In addition, surface ice velocities and strain-rates will be measured and the glacier bed sounded by radar to obtain the necessary glaciological information of the Piz Zupo area for the numerical flow modelling. Furthermore, an extensive glaciological data set on a high altitude core drilling site on Crater Glacier, Kamchatka Pensinsula, Russia, drilled by the Institute for Low Temperature Science, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan is available for this project.