  The main objective of the Action  is to advance our knowledge on the pathogenesis and prevention of obesity and the specific role of adipose tissue in the development of the metabolic syndrome. This approach is driven by the hypothesis that adipose tissue is critically involved in transducing environmental and nutritional factors into endogenous signals which mediate insulin resistance, vascular complications, beta cell dysfunction and the manifestation of type 2 diabetes. To reach the overall goal of this project, a multidisciplinary network will address the following secondary objectives: 1. Analysis of the central regulation of food intake and adipocyte storage function The main objective of this part of the Action  is to identify new molecular targets that may serve to control food intake and to prevent the development of the metabolic syndrome. One aim is related to the elucidation of the links between neuroendocrine dysregulation and adipose tissue secretory function and inflammation. Specifically, different neuroendocrine systems (cortisol axis, sex hormones, renin-angiotensin system) will be addressed and their impact for the aetiology of the metabolic syndrome will be evaluated. An additional specific objective is to promote our knowledge on glucose sensing systems and their role in the control of energy homeostasis and body weight. This includes attempts to identify hypothalamic genes with specific function for glucose sensing. A related aim is to study the dysregulation of hypothalamic nutrient sensing focusing on fatty acids. Furthermore, it is known that hypothalamic systems involved in energy balance and appetite regulation are subject to profound gender differences. Specific aims are to identify the molecular basis of this gender-related difference and its impact for obesity and type 2 diabetes. Adipose cell size is critically related to glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity. Therefore, a major goal is to understand how hypertrophy of adipose cells leads to impaired lipid storage capacity, impaired adipogenesis and systemic insulin resistance. 2. Elucidation of adipose tissue secretory function Adipose tissue is considered as a major endocrine organ. Advanced knowledge on this endocrine activity under normal and pathological conditions is of key importance for developing new strategies to combat major metabolic diseases related to adipose tissue dysfunction. Therefore, the main objective of this research task is to comprehensively explore the regulation of adipose tissue secretory function, the origin of secretory products within the tissue, the actions of these products at the local and peripheral levels and the pathophysiological relevance for humans. Additional objectives include the identification of novel secretory products and the investigation of the pathophysiological role of the adipose tissue and its secretory products in human or animal models of the metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes. Additional attempts will be made to define the secretory activity of different fat depots and their impact for the aetiology of the metabolic syndrome. Additional aims are to identify variants of genes coding for adipose secretory products, an important step towards defining new biomarkers of the metabolic syndrome. Finally, attempts will be made to better understand plasticity of adipose tissue, which may represent a new approach to prevention of the metabolic syndrome. 3. Assessment of the relationship between cytokines, inflammation and vascular dysfunction and skeletal muscle insulin resistance The combined effects of peripheral insulin resistance and vascular disease is devastating as it promotes uncontrolled hyperglycemia and damaging effects on peripheral organs and beta cells. It further promotes endothelial cell dysfunction towards the appearance of pre-atherosclerotic lesions and overt atherosclerosis accompanied with cardiac complications. One main objective is to identify the downstream targets of the crosstalk between adipose tissue-derived proinflammatory cytokines and vascular endothelial and smooth muscle cells. This will be essential to develop new therapeutic strategies for prevention of the secondary complications associated with the metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes. Attempts will also be made to uncover potential synergistic interactions between cytokines, hyperglycemia and increased levels of free fatty acids. This knowledge will help to improve therapeutic measures and patient stratification. A second main objective is to define the molecular targets involved in the initiation of skeletal muscle insulin resistance. This knowledge is essential for developing novel drug and life-style intervention strategies. 4. Gluco-lipotoxcity, islet inflammation, beta cell dysfunction and type 2 diabetes Multifactorial stressful stimuli are harmful to beta cells and affect their survival and function. Progressive damage and deterioration of these cells lead to decreased beta cell mass, altered insulin biosynthesis and impaired glucose-regulated insulin secretion. The main objective is to expand the current research on glucose- and free fatty acid-induced damage to beta cells to the role of adipose tissue-derived factors (i.e., proinflammatory cytokines) on the function of beta cells in such adverse environment. Detailed understanding of the molecular mechanisms that lead to beta cell apoptosis and dysfunction is essential for developing new strategies to prevent or delay the onset of type 2 diabetes. This knowledge will also help to define new biomarkers that may serve to identify patients at high risk for developing type 2 diabetes. Another important objective is to investigate and validate a current hypothesis that some harmful proinflammatory cytokines are produced by beta cells or islets exposed to hyperglycemia or fatty acids. The differentiation between effects of locally produced cytokines and adipose-tissue derived cytokines may provide better understanding of beta cell dysfunction and may lead to selective approaches to ameliorate the harmful consequences of each.