  The main objective of this Action  is to improve the potential of cancer therapy through the development and application of innovative vectors labelled with therapeutic radionuclides for targeted radionuclide therapy  of disseminated cancer. The vectors used may be based on monoclonal antibodies (or derivatives thereof), peptides, peptidomimetics, affibodies, amino acids or small organic molecules with well-defined tumour associated molecular targets. Besides the therapeutic probes, also imaging probes based on the same vectors are developed/applied in order to allow pre-therapeutic imaging for patient-specific dosimetry and therapy planning as well as for therapy monitoring. Recent advances in proteomics and genomics help to define new target molecules. Innovations are expected in such areas as ligand design, chemical ligation methods, radionuclide production, radionuclide generator design, etc. Although European laboratories have been responsible for many of the developments in targeted radionuclide therapy (including the discovery of monoclonal antibodies), the only two registered innovations in the field have come from the US. Therefore, it is crucial to develop stronger links amongst European scientists. The early involvement of the pharmaceutical industry/small companies with special expertise is fostered, also to promote implementation of the processes by insuring reliable, safe and standardized (e.g. GLP, GMP) methods. The Action  is highly interdisciplinary and includes nuclear medicine physicians, clinical oncologists, surgeons, physicists, radiobiologists, (in)organic chemists, radiochemists, radiopharmacists, pathologists and scientists from biomics. This combination results in a better insight into all aspects of the field Targeted Radionuclide Therapy . The Action  puts specific emphasis on the translation of preclinical research (i.e. new targets, radionuclides and compounds, dosimetric models and cellular/animal models) into the clinical practice of targeted radionuclide therapy. The techniques developed have an impact on the design of other ligand-targeted therapies such as ligand-toxin and ligand-chemotherapeutic agent conjugates. Direct Scientific Objectives: - To define new targets and new vectors - To synthesize and radiolabel new vectors - To evaluate the new vectors in e.g. pharmacokinetic, dosimetric and therapeutic studies and using animal imaging instrumentation - To advance targeted radionuclide therapy to a high scientific and technical status Additional Objectives: - To evaluate, coordinate and disseminate the acquired knowledge - To support the establishment of new SMEs, new (standardized) methods, new networks, etc - To contribute to/stimulate training through STSMs, participation of young scientists, etc. The ultimate goal and benefit of the Action  is the improvement of patient care; especially those patients who currently lack any effective therapy options for the treatment of their condition.