  1. Main/primary objectives The main objective of the Action  is to create a structure in which researchers in the field of EMF and health can share knowledge and information on: 1. How existing EMF technologies change either in their operating characteristics or in novel ways and applications in which they are used 2. Identifying what entirely new EMF technologies are introduced and on what time-scale 3. What novel emission and operating characteristics might result and what impact these would have on the device-specific and overall EMF exposure of people 4. What possible health effects could consequently arise and the scientific evidence for health concerns if any 5. How such concerns should be addressed through the use of evidence-based information and 6. What tools are effective in communicating and managing such risks and perceived risks. And, effectively publish all such information in the public sector for the benefit of all stakeholders. 2. Secondary objectives Secondary objectives of the Action  are: - To facilitate cooperation and knowledge sharing amongst multidisciplinary EMF and health researchers across Europe, and include new researchers in the process, in particular those from new EU member states. Emphasis will also be placed on helping early-stage researchers, including post graduate students, to present and discuss their work and learn from experienced researchers in the various fields of activity. Primary end users are scientific researchers. - To enlarge the field of cooperation to other disciplines. This to include researchers in wireless engineering, sensor development, medicine, epidemiology, biology, dosimetry, risk analysis, communication and public health. Primary end users are scientific researchers. - To identify where answers to addressing health issues related to emerging technologies require additional research effort and provide early warnings of problems ahead. Primary end users are the general scientific community and academic institutions across Europe. - To provide scientific information that can be used by international and national advisory bodies in producing interpretive and advisory documents. Primary end users are the EC, national government agencies and advisory bodies and manufacturing and service industries. - To further develop EMF exposure measurement and computational techniques and facilitate multidisciplinary collaboration between epidemiologists, biologists and dosimetrists in quantifying EMF emissions and exposures of people. Primary end users are scientific researchers. - To share the results of ongoing epidemiological, medical and biological EMF research including experience with novel biological techniques. Primary end users are scientific researchers. - To share knowledge of methods and tools for assessing public risk perception of emerging EMF technologies. Primary end users are national and local government agencies, advisory bodies, risk assessors and communicators.